Captured by Plamen T.THE GOAL  
A Process of Ongoing Improvement 
THIRD REVISED EDITION  
By 
Eliyahu M. Goldratt  
and 
Jeff Cox  
With interviews by David Whitford, 
Editor at Large, Fortune Small Business  
North River Press  
Captured by Plamen T.Additional copies can be obtained from your local 
bookstore or the publisher:  
The North River Press 
Publishing Corporation  
P.O. Box 567 
Great Barrington, MA 01230 
(800) 486-2665 or (413) 528-0034  
www.northriverpress.com  
First Edition Copyright © 1984 Eliyahu M. Goldratt 
Revised Edition Copyright © 1986 Eliyahu M. Goldratt 
Second revised Edition © 1992 Eliyahu M. Goldratt 
Third Revised Edition © 2004 Eliyahu M. Goldratt  
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or utilized in any form 
or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or 
any information storage retrieval system, without permission in writing from the 
publisher  
Manufactured in the United States of America 
Library of Congress Catalo ging-in-Publication Data  
Goldratt, Eliyahu M., 1948-  
The goal: a process of ongoing improvement  
I. Coxjeff, 1951-. II. Title 
PR9510.9.G64G61986     823     86-12566 
ISBN: 0-88427-178-1
Captured by Plamen T.INTRODUCTION  
 
The Goal is about science and education. I believe that these 
two words have been abused to the extent that their original 
meanings have been lost in a fog of too much respect and mys- 
tery. Science for me, and for the va st majority of respectable sci- 
entists, is not about the secrets of nature or even about truths. 
Science is simply the method we use to try and postulate a mini- 
mum set of assumptions that can explain, through a straightfor- 
ward logical derivation, the exis tence of many phenomena of na- 
ture. 
The Law of Conservation of Energy  of physics is not truth. It 
is just an assumption that is va lid in explaining a tremendous 
amount of natural phenomena. Such an assumption can never be 
proven since even an infinite nu mber of phenomena that can be 
explained by it does not prove its universal application. On the 
other hand, it can be disproved by just a single phenomenon that 
cannot be explained by the assump tion. This disproving does not 
detract from the validity of the assumption. It just highlights the 
need or even the existence of another assumption that is more 
valid. This is the case with the assumption of the conservation of 
energy which was replaced by Einstein's more global-more valid 
-postulation of the conservation of  energy and mass. Einstein's 
assumption is not true to the sa me extent that the previous one 
was not "true". 
Somehow we have restricted the connotation of science to a 
very selective, limited assembla ge of natural phenomena. We re- 
fer to science when we deal with physics, chemistry or biology. 
We should also realize that th ere are many more phenomena of 
nature that do not fall into th ese categories, for instance those 
phenomena we see in organizations, particularly those in indus- 
trial organizations. If these phenomena are not phenomena of 
nature, what are they? Do we want to place what we see in organi- 
zations to the arena of fiction rather than into reality? 
Captured by Plamen T.
1
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementThis book is an attempt to show that we can postulate a very 
small number of assumptions and utilize them to explain a very 
large spectrum of industrial phenomena. You the reader can 
judge whether or not the logic of the book's derivation from its 
assumptions to the phenomena we see daily in our plants is so 
flawless that you call it common sense. Incidentally, common 
sense is not so common and is th e highest praise we give to a 
chain of logical conclusions. If you do, you basically have taken 
science from the ivory tower of academia and put it where it 
belongs, within the reach of every one of us and made it applica- 
ble to what we see around us. 
What I have attempted to show with this book is that no 
exceptional brain power is needed  to construct a new science or 
to expand on an existing one. What  is needed is just the courage 
to face inconsistencies and to avoid running away from them just 
because "that's the way it was alwa ys done". I dared to interweave 
into the book a family life struggle,  which I assume is quite famil- 
iar to any manager who is to some extent obsessed with his work. 
This was not done just to make the book more popular, but to 
highlight the fact that we tend to disqualify many phenomena of 
nature as irrelevent as far as science is concerned. 
I have also attempted to show in the book the meaning of 
education. I sincerely believe that the only way we can learn is 
through our deductive process. Presenting us with final conclu- 
sions is not a way that we learn. At best it is a way that we are 
trained. That's why I tried to deliver the message contained in 
the book in the Socratic way. Jonah, in spite of his knowledge of 
the solutions, provoked Alex to derive them by supplying the 
question marks instead of the excl amation marks. I believe that 
because of this method, you the reader will deduce the answers 
well before Alex Rogo succeeds in doing so. If you find the book 
entertaining maybe you will agree wi th me that this is the way to 
educate, this is the way we should  attempt to write our textbooks. 
Our textbooks should not present us with a series of end results 
but rather a plot that enables the reader to go through the deduc- 
tion process himself. If I succeed  by this book to change some- 
what your perception of science and education, this is my true 
reward. 
Captured by Plamen T.
2
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementINTRODUCTION TO 
THE FIRST EDITION  
 
"The Goal" is about New global principles of manufacturing. 
It's about people trying to understand what makes their world 
tick so that they can make it better. As they think logically and 
consistently about their problems they are able to determine 
"cause and effect" relationships between their actions and the 
results. In the process they deduce some basic principles which 
they use to save their plant  and make it successful. 
I view science as nothing more than an understanding of the 
way the world is and why it is that way. At any given time our 
scientific knowledge is simply the current state of the art of our 
understanding. I do not believe in  absolute truths. I fear such 
beliefs because they block the search for better understanding. 
Whenever we think we have fina l answers progress, science, and 
better understanding ceases. Understanding of our world is not 
something to be pursued for its own sake, however. Knowledge 
should be pursued, I believe, to make our world better—to make 
life more fulfilling. 
There are several reasons I chose a novel to explain my un- 
derstanding of manufacturing—how it works (reality) and why it 
works that way. First, I want to make these principles more un- 
derstandable and show how they can bring order to the chaos 
that so often exists in our plants. Second, I wanted to illustrate 
the power of this understanding and the benefits it can bring. 
The results achieved are not fantasy; they have been, and are 
being, achieved in real plants. The western world does not have 
to become a second or third rate manufacturing power. If we just 
understand and apply the correct  principles, we can compete 
with anyone. I also hope that readers would see the validity and 
value of these principles in othe r organizations such as banks, 
hospitals, insurance companies and our families. Maybe the same 
potential for growth and improvem ent exists in all organizations. 
Finally, and most importantly, I wanted to show that we can 
Captured by Plamen T.
3
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementall be outstanding scientists. The secret of being a good scientist, I 
believe, lies not in our brain power. We have enough. We simply 
need to look at reality and think logically and precisely about 
what we see. The key ingredient is to have the courage to face 
inconsistencies between what we see and deduce and the way 
things are done. This challenging of basic assumptions is essential 
to breakthroughs. Almost everyone  who has worked in a plant is 
at least uneasy about the use of co st accounting efficiencies to 
control our actions. Yet few have challenged this sacred cow di- 
rectly. Progress in understanding requires that we challenge basic 
assumptions about how the world is and why it is that way. If we 
can better understand our world an d the principles that govern 
it, I suspect all our lives will be better. 
Good luck in your search for these principles and for your own 
understanding of "The Goal." 
Captured by Plamen T.
4
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementABOUT THE AUTHOR  
 
 
Dr. Eli Goldratt's book, The Goal has been a best seller since 
1984 and is recognized as one of the best-selling management 
books of all time. Recently, the Japanese edition of The Goal 
sold over 500,000 copies in less than one year after being re- 
leased. 
Eli Goldratt is the author of many other books including the 
business novels, It's Not Luck (the sequel to The Goal), Criti- 
cal Chain, and Necessary but Not Sufficient. His books have been 
Iranslated into 27 languages and sales have exceeded 6 million 
copies worldwide. His latest book is, Necessary but Not Sufficient, 
which focuses on the low rate of return obtained by companies 
on their huge investments in IT and enterprise resource plan- 
ning (ERP) systems. 
Eli Goldratt is the founder of TOC for education; a non-profit 
organization dedicated to bringing TOC thinking and tools to 
teachers and their students (www.tocforeducation.com). Dr. 
Goldratt currently spends his time promoting TOC for Edu- 
cation and The Goldratt Group while he continues to write, 
lecture and consult. 
For more information on Eli Goldratt and his current projects 
visit his web site at: www.eligoldratt.com.  
Captured by Plamen T.
5
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE GOAL  
THIRD REVISED EDITION  
 
Captured by Plamen T.
6
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement1 
I come through the gate this morning at 7:30 and I can see it 
from across the lot: the crimson Mercedes. It's parked beside the 
plant, next to the offices. And it's in my space. Who else would do 
that except Bill Peach? Never mind that the whole lot is practi- 
cally empty at that hour. Never mind that there are spaces 
marked "Visitor." No, Bill's got to park in the space with my title 
on it. Bill likes to make subtle statements. So, okay, he's the divi- 
sion vice-president, and I'm just a mere plant manager. I guess 
he can park his damn Merced es wherever he wants. 
I put my Mazda next to it (in the space marked "Controller"). 
A glance at the license as I walk around it assures me it has to be 
Bill's car because the plate says  "NUMBER 1." And, as we all 
know, that's absolutely correct in  terms of who Bill always looks 
out for. He wants his shot at CE O. But so do I. Too bad that I 
may never get the chance now. 
Anyway, I'm walking up to the office doors. Already the 
adrenalin is pumping. I'm wondering what the hell Bill is doing 
here. I've lost any hope of getting any work done this morning. I 
usually go in early to catch up on all the stuff I'm too busy to do 
during the day, because I can really get a lot done before the 
phone rings and the meetings star t, before the fires break out. 
But not today. 
"Mr. Rogo!" I hear someone calling. 
I stop as four people come bursting out of a door on the side 
of the plant. I see Dempsey, the shift supervisor; Martinez, the 
union steward; some hourly guy; and a machining center fore- 
man named Ray. And they're all ta lking at the same time. Demp- 
sey is telling me we've got a problem. Martinez is shouting about 
how there is going to be a walkout. The hourly guy is saying 
something about harassment. Ray is yelling that we can't finish 
some damn thing because we don't have all the parts. Suddenly 
I'm in the middle of all this. I'm looking at them; they're looking 
at me. And I haven't even  had a cup of coffee yet. 
When I finally get everyone calmed down enough to ask 
what's going on, I learn that Mr. Peach arrived about an hour 
before, walked into my plant, and demanded to be shown the 
status of Customer Order Number 41427.  
Captured by Plamen T.
7
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementWell, as fate would have it, nobody happened to know about 
Customer Order 41427. So Peach had everybody stepping and 
fetching to chase down the story on it. And it turns out to be a 
fairly big order. Also a late one. So what else is new? Everything 
in this plant is late. Based on observation, I'd say this plant has 
four ranks of priority for orders: Hot . . . Very Hot . . . Red 
Hot . . . and Do It NOW! We just  can't keep ahead of anything. 
As soon as he discovers 4142 7 is nowhere close to being 
shipped, Peach starts playing ex peditor. He's storming around, 
yelling orders at Dempsey. Finally it's determined almost all the 
parts needed are ready and waiting—stacks of them. But they 
can't be assembled. One part of some sub-assembly is missing; it 
still has to be run through some other operation yet. If the guys 
don't have the part, they can't assemble, and if they can't assem- 
ble, naturally, they can't ship. 
They find out the pieces for the missing subassembly are 
sitting over by one of the n/c machines, where they're waiting 
their turn to be run. But when they go to that department, they 
find the machinists are not setting up to run the part in question, 
but instead some other do-it-now job which somebody imposed 
upon them for some other product. 
Peach doesn't give a damn about the other do-it-now job. All 
he cares about is getting 41427 out the door. So he tells Dempsey 
to direct his foreman, Ray, to instruct his master machinist to 
forget about the other super-hot gizmo and get ready to run the 
missing part for 41427. Whereupon the master machinist looks 
from Ray to Dempsey to Peach, throws down his wrench, and 
tells them they're all crazy. It just took him and his helper an 
hour and a half to set up for the other part that everyone needed 
so desperately. Now they want to forget about it and set up for 
something else instead? The hell with it! So Peach, always the 
diplomat, walks past my supervisor and my foreman, and tells the 
master machinist that if he doesn't do what he's told, he's fired. 
More words are exchanged. The machinist threatens to walk off 
the job. The union steward show s up. Everybody is mad. Nobody 
is working. And now I've got four upset people greeting me 
bright and early in front of an idle plant. 
"So where is Bill Peach now?" I ask. 
"He's in your office," says Dempsey. 
"Okay, would you go tell him I'll be in to talk to him in a 
minute," I ask.  
Captured by Plamen T.
8
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementDempsey gratefully hurries toward  the office doors. I turn to 
Martinez and the hourly guy, who I discover is the machinist. I 
tell them that as far as I'm concerned there aren't going to be any 
firings or suspensions—that the whole thing is just a misunder- 
standing. Martinez isn't entirely sati sfied with that at first, and the 
machinist sounds as if he wants an apology from Peach. I'm not 
about to step into that one. I al so happen to know that Martinez 
can't call a walkout on his own authority. So I say if the union 
wants to file a grievance, okay; I'll be glad to talk to the local 
president, Mike O'Donnell, later today, and we'll handle every- 
thing in due course. Realizing he can't do anything more before 
talking to O'Donnell anyway, Martinez finally accepts that, and 
he and the hourly guy start walking back to the plant. 
"So let's get them back to work," I tell Ray. 
"Sure, but uh, what should we be working on?" asks Ray. 
"The job we're set up to ru n or the one Peach wants?" 
"Do the one Peach wants," I tell him. 
"Okay, but we'll be wasting a set-up," says Ray. 
"So we waste it!" I tell him. "Ray, I don't even know what the 
situation is. But for Bill to be here, there must be some kind of 
emergency. Doesn't that seem logical?" 
"Yeah, sure," says Ray. "Hey, I just want to know what to 
do." 
"Okay, I know you were just caug ht in the middle of all this," 
I say to try to make him feel better. "Let's just get that setup done 
as quick as we can and start running that part." 
"Right," he says. 
Inside, Dempsey passes me on his way back to the plant. He's 
just come from my office and he looks like he's in a hurry to get 
out of there. He shakes his head at me. 
"Good luck," he says out of  the corner of his mouth. 
The door to my office is wide ope n. I walk in, and there he is. 
Bill Peach is sitting behind my desk. He's a stocky, barrel-chested 
guy with thick, steely-gray hair and eyes that almost match. As I 
put my briefcase down, the eyes are locked onto me with a look 
that says This is your neck, Rogo.  
"Okay, Bill, what's going on?" I ask. 
He says, "We've got things to talk about. Sit down." 
I say, "I'd like to, but you're in my seat." 
It may have been the wrong thing to say.  
Captured by Plamen T.
9
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"You want to know why I'm here?" he says. "I'm here to save 
your lousy skin." 
I tell him, "Judging from the reception I just got, I'd say 
you're here to ruin my labor relations." 
He looks straight at me and says, "If you can't make some 
things happen around here, you're not going to have any labor to 
worry about. Because you're not going to have this plant to worry 
about. In fact, you may not have a job to worry about, Rogo." 
"Okay, wait a minute, take it ea sy," I say. "Let's just talk 
about it. What's the probl em with this order?" 
First of all, Bill tells me that he got a phone call last night at 
home around ten o'clock from go od old Bucky Burnside, presi- 
dent of one of UniCo's biggest customers. Seems that Bucky was 
having a fit over the fact that this order of his (41427) is seven 
weeks late. He proceeded to rake  Peach over the coals for about 
an hour. Bucky apparently had g one out on a limb to sway the 
order over to us when every body was telling him to give the 
business to one of our competitors. He had just had dinner with 
several of his customers, and they had dumped all over him be- 
cause their orders were late—which, as it happens, was because of 
us. So Bucky was mad (and probably a little drunk). Peach was 
able to pacify him only by promis ing to deal with the matter 
personally and by guaranteeing th at the order would be shipped 
by the end of today, no matter what mountains had to be moved. 
I try to tell Bill that, yes, we were clearly wrong to have let 
this order slide, and I'll give it my personal attention, but did he 
have to come in here this morn ing and disrupt my whole plant? 
So where was I last night, he a sks, when he tried to call me at 
home? Under the circumstances, I can't tell him I have a personal 
life. I can't tell him that the first two times the phone rang, I let it 
ring because I was in the middle of a fight with my wife, which, 
oddly enough, was about how little a ttention I've been giving her. 
And the third time, I didn't answer it because we were making 
up. 
I decide to tell Peach I was just late getting home. He doesn't 
press the issue. Instead, he asks how come I don't know what's 
going on inside my own plant. He's sick and tired of hearing 
complaints about late shipments. Why can't I stay on top of 
things? 
"One thing I do know," I tell him, "is that after the second 
round of layoffs you forced on us three months ago, along with 
Captured by Plamen T.
10
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementthe order for a twenty percent cutback, we're lucky to get any- 
thing out the door on time." 
"Al," he says quietly, "just build the damn products. You 
hear me?" 
"Then give me the people I need!" I tell him. 
"You've got enough people! Look at your efficiencies, for 
god's sake! You've got room for improvement, Al," he says. 
"Don't come crying to me about not enough people until you 
show me you can effectively use what you've got." 
I'm about to say something when Peach holds up his hand 
f o r  m e  t o  s h u t  m y  m o u t h .  H e  s t a n d s  u p  a n d  g o e s  o v e r  t o  c l o s e  t h e  
door. Oh shit, I'm thinking. 
He turns by the door and tells me, "Sit down." 
I've been standing all this time. I take a seat in one of the 
chairs in front of the desk, wher e a visitor would sit. Peach re- 
turns behind the desk. 
"Look, Al, it's a waste of time to argue about this. Your last 
operations report tells the story," says Peach. 
I say, "Okay, you're right. The issue is getting Burnside's 
order shipped—" 
Peach explodes. "Dammit, the i ssue is not Burnside's order! 
Burnside's order is just a symp tom of the problem around here. 
Do you think I'd come down here just to expedite a late order? 
Do you think I don't have enough  to do? I came down here to 
light a fire under you and everybody else in this plant. This isn't 
just a matter of customer service. Your plant is losing money." 
He pauses for a moment, as if he had to let that sink in. Then 
—bam—he pounds his fist on the desk top and points his finger 
at me. 
"And if you can't get the orders out the door," he continues, 
"then I'll show you how to do it. And if you still can't do it, then 
I've got no use for you or this plant." 
"Now wait a minute, Bill—" 
"Dammit, I don't have a minute !" he roars. "I don't have 
time for excuses anymore. And I don't need explanations. I need 
performance. I need shipments. I need income!" 
"Yes, I know that, Bill." 
"What you may not know is that this division is facing the 
worst losses in its history. We're fa lling into a hole so deep we may 
never get out, and your plant is the anchor pulling us in." 
I feel exhausted already. Tiredl y I ask him, "Okay, what do 
Captured by Plamen T.
11
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementyou want from me? I've been here six months. I admit it's gotten 
worse instead of better since I've been here. But I'm doing the 
best I can." 
"If you want the bottom line, Al, this is it: You've got three 
months to turn this plant around," Peach says. 
"And suppose it can't be done in that time?" I ask. 
"Then I'm going to go to the management committee with a 
recommendation to close the plant," he says. 
I sit there speechless. This is de finitely worse than anything I 
expected to hear this morning. An d, yet, it's not really that sur- 
prising. I glance out the window. The parking lot is filling with 
the cars of the people coming to work first shift. When I look 
back, Peach has stood up and is coming around the desk. He sits 
down in the chair next to me and leans forward. Now comes the 
reassurance, the pep talk. 
"Al, I know that the situation you inherited here wasn't the 
best. I gave you this job because I thought you were the one who 
could change this plant from a lo ser to ... well, a small winner 
at least. And I still think that. But if  you want to go places in this 
company, you've got to deliver results." 
"But I need time, Bill." 
"Sorry, you've got three mont hs. And if things get much 
worse, I may not even be able to give you that." 
I sit there as Bill glances at his watch and stands up, discus- 
sion ended. 
He says, "If I leave now, I'll only miss my first meeting." 
I stand up. He walks to the door. 
Hand on the knob, he turns and says with a grin, "Now that 
I've helped you kick some ass around here, you won't have any 
trouble getting Bucky's order shipped for me today, will you?" 
"We'll ship it, Bill," I say. 
"Good," he says with wink as he opens the door. 
A minute later, I watch from the window as he gets into his 
Mercedes and drives toward the gate. 
Three months. That's all I can think about. 
I don't remember turning away  from the window. I don't 
know how much time has passed. All of a sudden, I'm aware that 
I'm sitting at my desk and I'm staring into space. I decide I'd 
better go see for myself what's ha ppening out in the plant. From 
the shelf by the door, I get my hard hat and safety glasses and 
head out. I pass my secretary.  
Captured by Plamen T.
12
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Fran, I'll be out on the floor fo r a little while," I tell her as I 
go by. 
Fran looks up from a letter she's typing and smiles. 
"Okey-dokey," she says. "By the way, was that Peach's car I 
saw in your space this morning?" 
"Yes, it was." 
"Nice car," she says and she la ughs. "I thought it might be 
yours when I first saw it." 
Then I laugh. She leans forward across the desk. 
"Say, how much would a car li ke that cost?" she asks. 
"I don't know exactly, but I think it's around sixty thousand 
dollars," I tell her. 
Fran catches her breath. "You're kidding me! That much? I 
had no idea a car could cost that  much. Wow. Guess I won't be 
trading in my Chevette on  one of those very soon." 
She laughs and turns back to her typing. 
Fran is an "okey-dokey" lady. How old is she? Early forties 
I'd guess, with two teen-aged kids she's trying to support. Her 
ex-husband is an alcoholic. They got divorced a long time ago 
. . . since then, she's wanted nothing to do with a man. Well, 
almost nothing. Fran told me all this herself on my second day at 
the plant. I like her. I like her work, too. We pay her a good wage 
... at least we do now. Anyway , she's still got three months. 
Going into the plant is like entering a place where satans and 
angels have married to make kind of a gray magic. That's what it 
always feels like to me. All around are things that are mundane 
and miraculous. I've always foun d manufacturing plants to be 
fascinating places—even on just a visual level. But most people 
don't see them the way I do. 
Past a set of double doors separating the office from the 
plant, the world changes. Overhead  is a grid of lamps suspended 
from the roof trusses, and everything is cast in the warm, orange 
hues of sodium-iodine light. There is a huge chain-link cage 
which has row after row of floor- to-roof racks loaded with bins 
and cartons filled with parts and materials for everything we 
make. In a skinny aisle between two racks rides a man in the 
basket of a forklift crane that ru ns along a track on the ceiling. 
Out on the floor, a reel of shiny steel slowly unrolls into the 
machine that every few seconds says "Ca-chunk." 
Machines. The plant is really just one vast room, acres of 
i-pace. filled with machines. They are organized in blocks and the 
Captured by Plamen T.
13
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementblocks are separated by aisles. Most of the machines are painted 
in solid March Gras colors—orange, purple, yellow, blue. From 
some of the newer machines, ruby numbers shine from digital 
displays. Robotic arms perform pr ograms of mechanical dance. 
Here and there, often almost hidden among the machines, 
are the people. They look over as I walk by. Some of them wave; I 
wave back. An electric cart whines past, an enormous fat guy 
driving it. Women at long tables work with rainbows of wire. A 
grimy guy in amorphous coveralls adjusts his face mask and 
ignites a welding torch. Behind  glass, a buxom, red-haired 
woman pecks the keys on a comput er terminal with an amber 
display. 
Mixed with the sights is the noise, a din with a continuous 
underlying chord made by the wh irr of fans, motors, the air in 
the ventilators—it all sounds like an endless breath. At random 
comes a BOOM of something inex plicable. Behind me ring the 
alarm bells of an overhead crane rumbling up its track. Relays 
click. The siren sounds. From the P.A. system, a disembodied 
voice talks like God, intermittent ly and incomprehensibly, over 
everything. 
Even with all that noise, I hear the whistle. Turning, I see the 
unmistakable shape of Bob Donovan walking up the aisle. He's 
some distance away. Bob is what you might call a mountain of a 
man, standing as he does at six- foot-four. He weighs in at about 
250 pounds, a hefty portion of which is beer gut. He isn't the 
prettiest guy in the world ... I think his barber was trained by 
the Marines. And he doesn't talk re al fancy; I suspect it's a point 
of pride with him. But despite a few rough edges, which he 
guards closely, Bob is a good gu y. He's been production manager 
here for nine years. If you need something to happen, all you do 
is talk to Bob and if it can be done, it will be by the next time you 
mention it. 
It takes a minute or so for us to reach each other. As we get 
closer, I can see he isn't very cheerful. I suppose it's mutual. 
"Good morning," says Bob. 
"I'm not sure what's good abou t it," I say. "Did you hear 
about our visitor?" 
"Yeah, it's all over the plant," says Bob. 
"So I guess you know about the urgency for shipping a cer- 
tain order number 41427?" I ask him.  
Captured by Plamen T.
14
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementHe starts to turn red. "That's what I need to talk to you 
about." 
"Why? What's up?" 
"I don't know if word reached you yet, but Tony, that master 
machinist Peach yelled at, quit this morning," says Bob. 
"Aw, shit," I mutter. 
"I don't think I have to tell you that guys like that are not a 
dime a dozen. We're going to have a tough time finding a re- 
placement," says Bob. 
"Can we get him back?" 
"Well, we may not want him back," says Bob. "Before he 
quit, he did the set-up that Ray told him to do, and put the 
machine on automatic to do its run. The thing is, he didn't 
tighten two of the adjusting nuts. We  got little bits of machine tool 
all over the floor now." 
"How many parts do we have to scrap?" 
"Well, not that many. It only ran for a little while." 
"Will we have enough to fill that order?" I ask him. 
"I'll have to check," he says. "But, see, the problem is that 
the machine itself is down and it  may stay down for some time." 
"Which one is it?" I ask. 
"The NCX-10," he says. 
I shut my eyes. It's like a cold hand just reached inside me 
and grabbed the bottom of my stomach. That machine is the only 
one of its type in the plant. I ask Bob how bad the damage is. He 
says, "I don't know. They've got the thing half torn apart out 
there. We're on the phone with the manufacturer right now." 
I start walking fast. I want to see it for myself. God, are we in 
trouble. I glance over at Bob,  who is keeping pace with me. 
"Do you think it was sabotage?" I ask. 
Bob seems surprised. "Well, I can't say. I think the guy was 
just so upset he couldn't think straight. So he screwed it up." 
I can feel my face getting hot. The cold hand is gone. Now 
I'm so pissed off at Bill Peach that I'm fantasizing about calling 
him on the phone and screaming in his ear. It's his fault! And in 
my head I see him. I see him behind my desk and hear him 
telling me how he's going to show  me how to get the orders out 
the door. Right, Bill. You really  showed me how to do it. 
Captured by Plamen T.
15
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement2 
Isn't it strange to feel your own world is falling apart while 
those of the people close to you are rock steady? And you can't 
figure out why they're not affected the way you are. About 6:30, I 
slip away from the plant to run home and grab some dinner. As I 
come through the door, Julie looks up from the television. 
"Hi," she says. "Like my hair?" 
She turns her head. The thick, straight brown hair she used 
to have is now a mass of frizzed ringlets. And it isn't all the same 
color anymore. It's lighter in places. 
"Yeah, looks great," I say automatically. 
"The hairdresser said it sets off my eyes," she says, batting 
her long lashes at me. She has big, pretty blue eyes; they don't 
need to be "set off in my opinion, but what do I know? 
"Nice," I say. 
"Gee, you're not very enthusiastic," she says. 
"Sorry, but I've had a rough day." 
"Ah, poor baby," she says. "But I've got a great idea! We'll go 
out to dinner and you can forget all about it." 
I shake my head. "I can't. I've got to eat something fast and 
get back to the plant." 
She stands up and puts her hands on her hips. I notice she's 
wearing a new outfit. 
"Well you're a lot of fun!" she says. "And after I got rid of the 
kids, too." 
"Julie, I've got a crisis on my hands. One of my most expen- 
s i v e  m a c h i n e s  w e n t  d o w n  t h i s  m o r n i n g ,  a n d  I  n e e d  i t  t o  p r o c e s s  a  
part for a rush order. I've got to stay on top of this one," I tell 
her. 
"Okay. Fine. There is nothing to eat, because I thought we 
were going out," she says. "Last night, you said we were going 
out." 
Then I remember. She's right. It was part of the promises 
when we were making up after the fight. 
"I'm sorry. Look, maybe we can go out for an hour or so," I 
tell her. 
"That's your idea of a night on the town?" she says. "Forget 
it, Al!"  
Captured by Plamen T.
16
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Listen to me," I tell her. "Bill Peach showed up unexpect- 
edly this morning. He's talk ing about closing the plant." 
Her face changes. Did it brighten? 
"Closing the plant . . . really?" she asks. 
"Yeah, it's getting very bad." 
"Did you talk to him about where your next job would be?" 
she asks. 
After a second of disbelief, I say, "No, I didn't talk to him 
about my next job. My job is here—in this town, at this plant." 
She says, "Well, if the plant is going to close, aren't you inter- 
ested in where you're going to live next? I am." 
"He's only talking about it." 
"Oh," she says. 
I feel myself glaring at her. I say, "You really want to get out 
of this town as fast as you can, don't you?" 
"It isn't my home town, Al. I don't have the same sentimen- 
tal feelings for it you do," she says. 
"We've only been here six months," I say. 
"Is that all? A mere six months?" she says. "Al, I have no 
friends here. There's nobody except you to talk to, and you're 
not home most of the time. Your family is very nice, but after an 
hour with your mother, I go craz y. So it doesn't feel like six 
months to me." 
"What do you want me to do? I didn't ask to come here. The 
company sent me to do a job. It was the luck of the draw," I say. 
"Some luck." 
"Julie, I do not have time to ge t into another fight with you," 
I tell her. 
She's starting to cry. 
"Fine! Go ahead and leave! I'll just be here by myself," she 
crys. "Like every night." 
"Aw, Julie." 
I finally go put my arms around  her. We stand together for a 
few minutes, both of us quiet. When she stops crying, she steps 
back and looks up at me. 
"I'm sorry," she says. "If you ha ve to go back to the plant, 
then you'd better go." 
"Why don't we go out tomorrow night?" I suggest. 
She turns up her hands. "Fine . . . whatever." 
I turn, then look back. "Will you be okay?" 
"Sure. I'll find something to eat in the freezer," she says. 
Captured by Plamen T.
17
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementI've forgotten about dinner by now. I say, "Okay, I'll proba- 
bly pick up something on my way back to the plant. See you later 
tonight." 
Once I'm in the car, I find I've lost my appetite. 
Ever since we moved to Bearington, Julie has been having a 
hard time. Whenever we talk about the town, she always com- 
plains about it, and I always find myself defending it. 
I t ' s  t r u e  I  w a s  b o r n  a n d  r a i s e d  i n  B e a r i n g t o n ,  s o  I  d o  f e e l  a t  
home here. I know all the streets. I know the best places to go to 
buy things, the good bars and the places you stay out of, all that 
stuff. There is a sense of ownership I have for the town, and more 
affection for it than for some other burg down the highway. It 
was home for eighteen years. 
But I don't think I have too many illusions about it. Bear- 
ington is a factory town. Anyone passing through probably 
wouldn't see anything special about the place. Driving along, I 
look around and have much th e same reaction. The neighbor- 
hood where we live looks like any other American suburb. The 
houses are fairly new. There are shopping centers nearby, a litter 
of fast-food restaurants, and over next to the Interstate is a big 
mall. I can't see much difference here from any of the other 
suburbs where we've lived. 
Go to the center of town and it is a little depressing. The 
streets are lined with old brick buildings that have a sooty, crum- 
bling look to them. A number of store fronts are vacant or cov- 
ered with plywood. There are pl enty of railroad tracks, but not 
many trains. 
On the corner of Main and Lincoln is Bearington's one high- 
rise office building, a lone towe r on the skyline. When it was 
being built some ten years ago, the building was considered to be 
a very big deal around here, all fourteen stories of it. The fire 
department used it as an excuse to go buy a brand new fire en- 
gine, just so it would have a ladder long enough to reach to the 
top. (Ever since then, I think they' ve secretly been waiting for a 
fire to break out in the penthou se just to use the new ladder.) 
Local boosters immediately claimed that the new office tower was 
some kind of symbol of Bearington' s vitality, a sign of re-birth in 
an old industrial town. Then a co uple of years ago, the building 
management erected an enormous sign on the roof which says in 
red block letters: "Buy Me!" It gives a phone number. From the 
Captured by Plamen T.
18
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementInterstate, it looks like the whole town is for sale. Which isn't too 
far from the truth. 
On my way to work each day, I pass another plant along the 
road to ours. It sits behind a rusty chain-link fence with barbed 
wire running along the top. In fr ont of the plant is a paved park- 
ing lot—five acres of concrete with tufts of brown grass poking 
through the cracks. Years have gone by since any cars have 
parked there. The paint has fade d on the walls and they've got a 
chalky look to them. High on the long front wall you can still 
make out the company name; there's darker paint where the let- 
ters and logo had once been before they were removed. 
The company that owned the plant went south. They built a 
new plant somewhere in North Carolina. Word has it they were 
trying to run away from a bad situation with their union. Word 
also has it that the union probably will catch up with them again 
in about five years or so. But meanwhile they'll have bought 
themselves five years of lowe r wages and maybe fewer hassles 
from the work force. And five yea rs seem like eternity as far as 
modern management planning is concerned. So Bearington got 
another industrial dinosaur carcass on its outskirts and about 
2,000 people hit the street. 
Six months ago, I had occasion to go inside the plant. At the 
time, we were just looking for some cheap warehouse space 
nearby. Not that it was my job, but I went over with some other 
people just to look the place ov er. (Dreamer that I was when I 
first got here, I thought maybe someday we'd need more space to 
expand. What a laugh that is now.) It was the silence that really 
got to me. Everything was so quiet . Your footsteps echoed. It was 
weird. All the machines had been  removed. It was just a huge 
empty place. 
Driving by it now, I can't help thinking, that's going to be us 
in three months. It gives me a sick feeling. 
I hate to see this stuff happening. The town has been losing 
major employers at the rate of about one a year ever since the 
mid-1970s. They fold completely, or they pull out and go else- 
where. There doesn't seem to be any end to it. And now it may be 
our turn. 
When I came back to manage this plant, the Bearington Her- 
ald did a story on me. I know, big de al. But I was kind of a minor 
celebrity for a while. The local boy had made it big. It was sort of 
a high-school fantasy come true. I ha te to think that the next time 
Captured by Plamen T.
19
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementmy name is in the paper, the story might be about the plant 
closing. I'm starting to feel  like a traitor to everybody. 
Donovan looks like a nervous gorilla when I get back to the 
plant. With all the running around he's done today, he must have 
lost five pounds. As I walk up the aisle toward the NCX-10, I 
watch him shifting his weight from  one leg to the other. Then he 
paces for a few seconds and stops. Suddenly he darts across the 
aisle to talk to someone. And then he takes off to check on some- 
thing. I give him a shrill, two-fing er whistle, but he doesn't hear 
it. I have to follow him through two departments before I can 
catch up with him—back at the NCX-10. He looks surprised to 
see me. 
"We going to make it?" I ask him. 
"We're trying," he says. 
"Yeah, but can we do it?" 
"We're doing our best," he says. 
"Bob, are we going to ship the order tonight or not?" 
"Maybe." 
I turn away and stand there looking at the NCX-10. Which is 
a lot to look at. It's a big hunk of equipment, our most expensive 
n/c machine. And it's painted a glossy, distinctive lavender. (Don't 
ask me why.) On one side is a control board filled with red, green, 
and amber lights, shiny toggle switches, a jet black keyboard, tape 
drives, and a computer display. It's a sexy-looking machine. And 
the focus of it all is the metal-working being done in the middle of 
it, where a vise holds a piece of steel. Shavings of metal are being 
sliced away by a cutting tool. A steady wash of turquoise lubricant 
splashes over the work and carries away the chips. At least the 
damn thing is working again. 
We were lucky today. The damage wasn't as bad as we had 
first thought. But the service technician didn't start packing his 
tools until 4:30. By then, it was already second shift. 
We held everybody in assembly on overtime, even though 
overtime is against current divi sion policy. I don't know where 
we'll bury the expense, but we've to go get this order shipped 
tonight. I got four phone calls today just from our marketing 
manager, Johnny Jons. He too has been getting his ear chewed— 
from Peach, from his own sales people, and from the customer. 
We absolutely must ship this order tonight. 
So I'm hoping nothing else goes  wrong. As soon as each part 
Captured by Plamen T.
20
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementis finished, it's individually carri ed over to where it's fitted into 
the subassembly. And as soon as that happens, the foreman over 
there is having each subassembly carted down to final assembly. 
You want to talk about efficien cy? People hand-carrying things 
one at a time, back and forth . . . our output of parts per em- 
ployee must be ridiculous. It's crazy. In fact, I'm wondering, 
where did Bob get all the people? 
I take a slow look around. There is hardly anybody working 
in the departments that don't hav e something to do with 41427. 
Donovan has stolen every body he could grab and put them all to 
work on this order. This is not the way it's supposed to be done. 
But the order ships. 
I glance at my watch. It's a few minutes past 11:00 P.M. We're 
on the shipping dock. The doors on the back of the tractor-trailer 
are being closed. The driver is climbing up into his seat. He revs 
the engine, releases the brakes, and eases out into the night. 
I turn to Donovan. He turns to me. 
"Congratulations," I tell him. 
"Thanks, but don't ask me how we did it," he says. 
"Okay, I won't. What do you say we find ourselves some 
dinner?" 
For the first time all day, Donovan smiles. Way off in the 
distance, the truck shifts gears. 
We take Donovan's car because it's closer. The first two 
places we try are closed. So then  I tell Donovan just to follow my 
directions. We cross the river at 16th Street and drive down Bes- 
semer into South Flat until we get to the mill. Then I tell Dono- 
van to hang a right and we snake our way through the side 
streets. The houses back in there are built wall to wall, no yards, 
no grass, no trees. The streets are narrow and everyone parks in 
the streets, so it makes for some tedious maneuvering. But finally 
we pull up in front of Sednikk's Bar and Grill. 
Donovan takes a look at the place and says, "You sure this is 
where we want to be?" 
"Yeah, yeah. Come on. They've  got the best burgers in 
town," I tell him. 
Inside, we take a booth toward the rear. Maxine recognizes 
me and comes over to make a fuss.  We talk for a minute and then 
Donovan and I order some bu rgers and fries and beer. 
Donovan looks around and says, "How'd you know about 
this place?"  
Captured by Plamen T.
21
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementI say, "Well, I had my first s hot-and-a-beer over there at the 
bar. I think it was the third stool on  the left, but it's been a while." 
Donovan asks, "Did you start drin king late in life, or did you 
grow up in this town?" 
"I grew up two blocks from he re. My father owned a corner 
grocery store. My brother runs it today." 
"I didn't know you were from  Bearington," says Donovan. 
"With all the transfers, it's take n me about fifteen years to get 
back here," I say. 
The beers arrive. 
Maxine says, "These two are on Joe." 
She points to Joe Sednikk who stands behind the bar. Dono- 
van and I wave out thanks to him. 
Donovan raises his glass, and says, "Here's to getting 41427 
out the door." 
"I'll drink to that," I say an d clink my glass against his. 
After a few swallows, Donovan lo oks much more relaxed. But 
I'm still thinking about what went on tonight. 
"You know, we paid a hell of a price for that shipment," I 
say. "We lost a good machinist. There's the repair bill on the 
NCX-10. Plus the overtime." 
"Plus the time we lost on th e NCX-10 while it was down," 
adds Donovan. Then he says, "But you got to admit that once we 
got rolling, we really moved. I wi sh we could do that every day." 
I laugh. "No thanks. I don't need days like this one." 
"I don't mean we need Bill Peach to walk into the plant every 
day. But we did ship the order," says Donovan. 
"I'm all for shipping orders, Bo b, but not the way we did it 
tonight," I tell him. 
"It went out the door, didn't it?" 
"Yes, it did. But it was the way that it happened that we can't 
allow." 
"I just saw what had to be done , put everybody to work on it, 
and the hell with the rules," he says. 
"Bob, do you know what our e fficiencies would look like if 
we ran the plant like that every da y?" I ask. "We can't just dedi- 
cate the entire plant to one order at a time. The economies of 
scale would disappear. Our costs would go—well, they'd be even 
worse than they are now. We can't run the plant just by the seat- 
of-the-pants." 
Captured by Plamen T.
22
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementDonovan becomes quiet. Finally he says, "Maybe I learned 
too many of the wrong things back when I was an expediter." 
"Listen, you did a hell of a job today. I mean that. But we set 
policy for a purpose. You should know that. And let me tell you 
that Bill Peach, for all the trouble he caused to get one order 
shipped, would be back here pounding on our heads at the end 
of the month if we didn't ma nage the plant for efficiency." 
He nods slowly, but then he asks , "So what do we do the next 
time this happens?" 
I smile. 
"Probably the same damn thing, " I tell him. Then I turn and 
say, "Maxine, give us two more here, please. No, on second 
thought, we're going to save you a lot of walking. Make it a 
pitcher." 
So we made it through today's crisis. We won. Just barely. 
And now that Donovan is gone an d the effects of the alcohol are 
wearing off, I can't see what ther e was to celebrate. We managed 
to ship one very late order today. Whoopee. 
The real issue is I've got a manufacturing plant on the criti- 
cal list. Peach has given it three months to live before he pulls the 
plug. 
That means I have two, mayb e three more monthly reports 
in which to change his mind. After that, the sequence of events 
will be that he'll go to corpor ate management and present the 
numbers. Everybody around the table will look at Granby. 
Granby will ask a couple of questions, look at the numbers one 
more time, and nod his head. And that will be it. Once the execu- 
tive decision has been made, th ere will be no changing it. 
They'll give us time to finish our backlog. And then 600 peo- 
ple will head for the unemployme nt lines—where they will join 
their friends and former co-workers, the other 600 people whom 
we have already laid off. 
And so the UniWare Division will drop out of yet another 
market in which it can't compete. Which means the world will no 
longer be able to buy any more of the fine products we can't 
make cheap enough or fast enou gh or good enough or some- 
thing enough to beat the Japanese. Or most anybody else out 
there for that matter. That's what makes us another fine division 
in the UniCo "family" of businesse s (which has a record of earn- 
ings growth that looks like Kansas), and that's why we'll be just 
Captured by Plamen T.
23
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementanother fine company in the Who-Knows-What Corporation af- 
ter the big boys at headquarters put together some merger with 
some other loser. That seems to be the essence of the company's 
strategic plan these days. 
What's the matter with us? 
Every six months it seems like some group from corporate is 
coming out with some new program that's the latest panacea to 
all our problems. Some of them seem to work, but none of them 
does any good. We limp along month after month, and it never 
gets any better. Mostly it gets worse. 
Okay. Enough of the bitching, Rogo. Try to calm down. Try 
to think about this rationally. Ther e's nobody around. It's late. I 
am alone finally . . . here in the coveted corner office, throne 
room of my empire, such as it is. No interruptions. The phone is 
not ringing. So let's try to analyze the situation. Why can't we 
consistently get a quality product out the door on time at the cost 
that can beat the competition? 
Something is wrong. I don't know what it is, but something 
basic is very wrong. I must  be missing something. 
I'm running what should be a good plant. Hell, it is a good 
plant. We've got the technology. We've got some of the best n/c 
machines money can buy. We've got robots. We've got a com- 
puter system that's supposed to do everything but make coffee. 
We've got good people. For the most part we do. Okay, we're 
short in a couple of areas, bu t the people we have are good for 
the most part, even though we sure could use more of them. And 
I don't have too many problems wi th the union. They're a pain in 
the ass sometimes, but the competition has unions too. And, hell, 
the workers made some concessions last time—not as many as 
we'd have liked, but we have a livable contract. 
I've got the machines. I've got the people. I've got all the 
materials I need. I know there's a market out there, because the 
competitors' stuff is selling. So what the hell is it? 
It's the damn competition. That's what's killing us. Ever 
since the Japanese entered our markets, the competition has been 
incredible. Three years ago, they were beating us on quality and 
product design. We've just about matched them on those. But 
now they're beating us on price and deliveries. I wish I knew 
their secret. 
What can I possibly do to be more competitive?  
Captured by Plamen T.
24
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementI've done cost reduction. No other manager in this division 
has cut costs to the degree I have. There is nothing left to trim. 
And, despite what Peach says, my efficiencies are pretty 
damn good. He's got other plants  with worse, I know that. But 
the better ones don't have the co mpetition I do. Maybe I could 
push efficiencies some more, but ... I don't know. It's like 
whipping a horse that's already running as fast as it can. 
We've just got to do something about late orders. Nothing in 
this plant ships until it's expedited. We've got stacks and stacks of 
inventory out there. We release the materials on schedule, but 
nothing comes out the far end when it's supposed to. 
That's not uncommon. Just about every plant I know of has 
expeditors. And you walk through just about any plant in Amer- 
ica about our size and you'll find work-in-process inventory on 
the same scale as what we have. I don't know what it is. On the 
one hand, this plant is no worse th an most of the ones I've seen— 
and, in fact, it's better than many. But we're losing money. 
If we could just get our backlog out the door. Sometimes it's 
like little gremlins out there. Every time we start to get it right, 
they sneak around between shifts when nobody is looking and 
they change things just enough so everything gets screwed up. I 
swear it's got to be gremlins. 
Or maybe I just don't know enough. But, hell, I've got an 
engineering degree. I've got an  MBA. Peach wouldn't have 
named me to the job if he hadn't thought I was qualified. So it 
can't be me. Can it? 
Man, how long has it been since I started out down there in 
industrial engineering as a smart kid who knew everything— 
fourteen, fifteen years? How many  long days have there been 
since then? 
I used to think if I worked hard I could do anything. Since 
the day I turned twelve I've worked. I worked after school in my 
old man's grocery store. I worked through high school. When I 
was old enough, I spent my summers  working in the mills around 
here. I was always told that if I worked hard enough it would pay 
off in the end. That's true, isn't it? Look at my brother; he took 
the easy way out by being the fi rst born. Now he owns a grocery 
store in a bad neighborhood across town. But look at me. I 
worked hard. I sweated my way through engineering school. I 
got a job with a big company. I made  myself a stranger to my wife 
and kids. I took all the crap that UniCo could give me and said, 
Captured by Plamen T.
25
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"I can't get enough! Give me more!"  Boy, am I glad I did! Here I 
am, thirty-eight years old, and I'm a crummy plant manager! 
Isn't that wonderful? I' m really having fun now. 
Time to get the hell out of here. I've had enough fun for one 
day. 
Captured by Plamen T.
26
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement3 
I wake up with Julie on top of me. Unfortunately, Julie is not 
being amorous- she is reaching for the night table where the digi- 
tal alarm clock says 6:03 A.M. The alarm buzzer has been droning 
for three minutes. Julie smashes the button to kill it. With a sigh, 
she rolls off of me. Moments later,  I hear her breathing resume a 
steady pace; she is asleep again. Welcome to a brand new day. 
About forty-five minutes later, I'm backing the Mazda out of 
the garage. It's still dark outsid e. But a few miles down the road 
the sky lightens. Halfway to the ci ty, the sun rises. By then, I'm 
too busy thinking to notice it at first. I glance to the side and it's 
floating out there beyond the trees. What makes me mad some- 
times is that I'm always running  so hard that—like most other 
people, I guess—I don't have time to pay attention to all the daily 
miracles going on around me. Instea d of letting me eyes drink in 
the dawn, I'm watching the road and worrying about Peach. He's 
called a meeting at headquarters for all the people who directly 
report to him—in essence, his plant managers and his staff. The 
meeting, we are told, is to begin promptly at 8:00 A.M. The funny 
thing is that Peach is not saying what the meeting is about. It's a 
big secret—you know: hush-hush, like maybe there's a war on or 
s o m e t h i n g .  H e  h a s  i n s t r u c t e d  u s  t o  be there at eight and to bring 
with us reports and other data that'll let us go through a thor- 
ough assessment of all the division's operations. 
Of course, all of us have found out what the meeting is about. 
At least we have a fairly good idea. According to the grapevine, 
Peach is going to use the meetin g to lay some news on us about 
how badly the division performed in the first quarter. Then he's 
going to hit us with a mandate for a new productivity drive, with 
targeted goals for each plant and commitments and all that great 
stuff. I suppose that's the reason for the commandment to be 
there at eight o'clock on the butt on with numbers in hand; Peach 
must've thought it would lend a proper note of discipline and 
urgency to the proceedings. 
The irony is that in order to be there at such an early hour, 
half the people attending will have had to fly in the night before. 
Which means hotel bills and extra meals. So in order to an- 
Captured by Plamen T.
27
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementnounce to us how badly the division is doing, Peach is going to 
pay out a couple of grand more t han he would have had to pay if 
he'd begun the meeting an hour or two later. 
I think that Peach may be starting to lose it. Not that I sus- 
pect him of drifting toward a breakdown or anything. It's just 
that everything seems to be an over-reaction on his part these 
days. He's like a general who know s he is losing the battle, but 
forgets his strategy in his desperation to win. 
He was different a couple of years ago. He was confident. He 
wasn't afraid to delegate res ponsibility. He'd let you run your 
own show—as long as you brought in a respectable bottom line. 
He tried to be the "enlightened" manager. He wanted to be open 
to new ideas. If some consulta nt came in and said, "Employees 
have to feel good about their work  in order to be productive," 
Peach would try to listen. But that was when sales were better and 
budgets were flush. 
What does he say now? 
"I don't give a damn if they feel good," he says. "If it costs an 
extra nickel, we're not paying for it." 
That was what he said to a manager who was trying to sell 
Peach on the idea of a physical fitness center where employees 
could work out, the premise being that everyone would do better 
work because healthy employees are happy employees, etc. Peach 
practically threw him out of his office. 
And now he's walking into my plant and wreaking havoc in 
the name of improving customer se rvice. That wasn't even the 
first fight I've had with Peach. There have been a couple of oth- 
ers, although none as serious as yesterday's. What really bugs me 
is I used to get along very well with Peach. There was a time when 
I thought we were friends. Back when I was on his staff, we'd sit 
in his office at the end of the day sometimes and just talk for 
hours. Once in a while, we'd go out and get a couple of drinks 
together. Everybody thought I was brown-nosing the guy. But I 
think he liked me precisely becaus e I wasn't. I just did good work 
for him. We hit it off together. 
Once upon a time, there was a crazy night in Atlanta at the 
annual sales meeting, when Peac h and I and a bunch of wackos 
from marketing stole the piano from the hotel bar and had a 
sing-along in the elevator. Other hotel guests who were waiting 
for an elevator would see the doors open, and there we'd be, 
midway through the chorus of some Irish drinking song with 
Captured by Plamen T.
28
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementPeach sitting there at the keyboard tickling those ivories. (He's a 
pretty good piano player, too). After an hour, the hotel manager 
finally caught up with us. By then, the crowd had grown too big 
for the elevator, and we were up on the roof singing to the entire 
city. I had to pull Bill out of this fight with the two bouncers 
whorn the manager had enlisted to kill the party. What a night 
that was. Bill and I ended up toasting each other with orange 
juice at dawn in some greasy-spoon diner on the wrong end of 
town. 
Peach was the one who let me know that I really had a future 
with this company. He was the guy who pulled me into the pic- 
ture when I was just a project en gineer, when all I knew was how 
to try hard. He was the one who pi cked me to go to headquarters. 
It was Peach who set it up so I could go back and get my MBA. 
Now we're screaming at each other. I can't believe it. 
By 7:50, I'm parking my car in the garage under the UniCo 
Building. Peach and his division st aff occupy three floors of the 
building. I get out of the car and get my briefcase from the trunk. 
It weighs about ten pounds today, because it's full of reports and 
computer printouts. I'm not expect ing to have a nice day. With a 
frown on my face, I start to walk to the elevator. 
"Al!" I hear from behind me. 
I turn; it's Nathan Selwin comi ng toward me. I wait for him. 
"How's it going?" he asks. 
"Okay. Good to see you again," I tell him. We start walking 
together. "I saw the memo on your  appointment to Peach's staff. 
Congratulations.'' 
"Thanks," he says. "Of course, I don't know if it's the best 
place to be right now with everything that's going on." 
"How come? Bill keeping you working nights?" 
"No, it's not that," he says. Then he pauses and looks at me. 
'Haven't you heard the news?" 
"What about?" 
He stops suddenly and looks around. There is nobody else 
around us. 
"About the division," he says in a low voice. 
I shrug; I don't know w hat he's talking about. 
"The whole division is going to go on the block," he says. 
Everybody on Fifteen is crapping  in their pants. Peach got the 
word from Granby a week ago. He's got till the end of the year to 
Captured by Plamen T.
29
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementimprove performance, or the whole division goes up for sale. And 
I don't know if it's true, but I he ard Granby specifically say that if 
the division goes, Peach goes with it." 
"Are you sure?" 
Nathan nods and adds, "Apparently it's been in the making 
for quite a while." 
We start walking again. 
My first reaction is that it's no wonder Peach has been acting 
like a madman lately. Everything he's worked for is in jeopardy. 
If some other corporation buys the division, Peach won't even 
have a job. The new owners will want to clean house and they're 
sure to start at the top. 
And what about me; will I have a job? Good question, Rogo. 
Before hearing this, I was going on the assumption that Peach 
would probably offer me some kind of position if the plant is shut 
down. That's usually the way it goes. Of course, it may not be 
what I want. I know there aren't  any UniWare plants out there in 
need of a manager. But I figured maybe Peach would give me my 
old staff job back—although I also  know it's already been filled 
and I've heard that Peach is very satisfied with the guy. Come to 
think of it, he did kind of threaten yesterday with his opening 
remarks that I might not have a job. 
Shit, I could be on the street in three months!  
"Listen, Al, if anybody asks you, you didn't hear any of this 
from me," says Nat. 
And he's gone. I find myself standing alone in the corridor 
on the fifteenth floor. I don't ev en remember having gotten on 
the elevator, but here I am. I vagu ely recall Nat talking to me on 
the way up, saying something about everybody putting out their 
resumes. 
I look around, feel stupid, wonder where I'm supposed to be 
now, and then I remember the meeting. I head down the hall 
where I see some others going into a conference room. 
I go in and take a seat. Peach is standing at the far end of the 
table. A slide projector sits in fron t of him. He's starting to talk. A 
clock on the wall indicates it's exactly eight o'clock. 
I look around at the others. Th ere are about twenty of them, 
most of them looking at Peach.  One of them, Hilton Smyth, is 
looking at me. He's a plant manager, too, and he's a guy I've 
never liked much. For one thing, I resent his style—he's always 
promoting some new thing he's doing, and most of the time what 
Captured by Plamen T.
30
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementhe's doing isn't any different from the things everyone else is 
doing. Anyway, he's looking at me as  if he's checking me out. Is it 
because I look a little shaken? I wonder what he knows. I stare 
back at him until he turns toward Peach. 
When I'm finally able to tune into what Peach is saying, I 
find he's turning the discussion over to the division controller, 
Ethan Frost, a thin and wrinkl ed old guy who, with a little 
makeup, could double for the Grim Reaper. 
The news this morning befits the messenger. The first quar- 
ter has just ended, and it's been a terrible one everywhere. The 
division is now in real danger of a shortfall in cash. All belts must 
be tightened. 
When Frost is done, Peach stands and proceeds to deliver 
some stern talk about how we're go ing to meet this challenge. I 
try to listen, but after his first couple of sentences, my mind drops 
out. All I hear are fragments. 
". . . imperative for us to minimize the downside risk . . ." 
". . . acceptable to our current marketing posture . . ." ". . . 
without reducing strategic expe nse ...""... required sacri- 
fices . . ." ". . . productivi ty improvements at all loca- 
tions . . ." 
Graphs from the slide projector begin to flash on the screen. 
A relentless exchange of measurements between Peach and the 
others goes on and on. I make an effort, but I just can't concen- 
trate. 
"... first quarter sales down twenty-two percent compared 
to a year ago ..." "... tota l raw materials' costs in- 
creased . . ." ". . . direct labor  ratios of hours applied to hours 
paid had a three-week high . . ." ". . . now if you look at num- 
bers of hours applied to production versus standard, we're off by 
over twelve percent on those efficiencies . . ." 
I'm telling myself that I've got to get hold of myself and pay 
attention. I reach into my jacket to get a pen to take some notes. 
"And the answer is clear," Peac h is saying. "The future of 
our business depends upon our ability to increase productivity." 
But I can't find a pen. So I re ach into my other pocket. And I 
pull out the cigar. I stare at it. I don't smoke anymore. For a few 
seconds I'm wondering where the hell this cigar came from. 
And then I remember.  
Captured by Plamen T.
31
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement4 
Two weeks ago, I'm wearing the same suit as now. This is 
back in the good days when I thin k that everything will work out. 
I'm traveling, and I'm between planes at O'Hare. I've got some- 
time, so I go to one of the air line lounges. Inside, the place is 
jammed with business types like me. I'm looking for a seat in this 
place, gazing over the three-piece pinstripes and the women in 
conservative blazers and so on, when my eye pauses on the yar- 
mulke worn by the man in the sweater. He's sitting next to a 
lamp, reading, his book in one h and and his cigar in the other. 
Next to him there happens to be an empty seat. I make for it. Not 
until I've almost sat down does it  strike me I think I know this 
guy. 
Running into someone you know in the middle of one of the 
busiest airports in the world carries  a shock with it. At first, I'm 
not sure it's really him. But he looks too much like the physicist I 
used to know for him to be anyone but Jonah. As I start to sit 
down, he glances up at me from his book, and I see on his face 
the same unspoken quest ion: Do I know you? 
"Jonah?" I ask him. 
"Yes?" 
"I'm Alex Rogo. Remember me?" 
His face tells me that he doesn't quite. 
"I knew you some time ago," I tell him. "I was a student. I 
got a grant to go and study some of the mathematical models you 
were working on. Remember? I had a beard back then." 
A small flash of recognition fina lly hits him. "Of course! Yes, 
I do remember you. 'Alex,' was it?" 
"Right." 
A waitress asks me if I'd like something to drink. I order a 
scotch and soda and ask Jonah if he'll join me. He decides he'd 
better not; he has to leave shortly. 
"So how are you thes e days?" I ask. 
"Busy," he says. "Very busy. And you?" 
"Same here. I'm on my way to Houston right now," I say. 
"What about you?" 
"New York," says Jonah.  
Captured by Plamen T.
32
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementHe seems a little bored with this line of chit-chat and looks as 
if he'd like to finish the conversation. A second of quiet falls be- 
tween us. But, for better or wors e, I have this tendency (which 
I've never been able to bring unde r control) of filling silence in a 
conversation with my own voice. 
"Funny, but after all those plans I had back then of going 
into research, I ended up in busi ness," I say. "I'm a plant man- 
ager now for UniCo." 
Jonah nods. He seems more interested. He takes a puff on 
his cigar. I keep talkin g. It doesn't take much to keep me going. 
"In fact, that's why I'm on my way to Houston. We belong to 
a manufacturers' association, and the association invited UniCo 
to be on a panel to talk about r obotics at the annual conference. I 
got picked by UniCo, because my plant has the most experience 
with robots." 
"I see," says Jonah. "Is this going to be a technical discus- 
sion?" 
"More business oriented than t echnical," I say. Then I re- 
member I have something I can show  him. "Wait a second. . . ." 
I crack open my briefcase on my lap and pull out the ad- 
vance copy of the program the association sent me. 
"Here we are," I say, and read the listing to him. " 'Robotics: 
Solution to America's Productivity Crisis in the new millenium ... a 
panel of users and experts discu sses the coming impact of indus- 
trial robots on American manufacturing.' ' 
But when I look back to him, Jonah doesn't seem very im- 
pressed. I figure, well, he's an ac ademic person; he's not going to 
understand the business world. 
"You say your plant uses robots?" he asks. 
"In a couple of departments, yes," I say. 
"Have they really increased productivity at your plant?" 
"Sure they have," I say. "We had—what?" I scan the ceiling 
for the figure. "I think it was a thirty-six percent improvement in 
one area." 
"Really . . . thirty-six percent?" asks Jonah. "So your com- 
pany is making thirty-six per cent more money from your plant 
just from installing some robots? Incredible." 
I can't hold back a smile. 
"Well . . . no," I say. "We all wish it were that easy! But it's 
a lot more complicated than that. See, it was just in one depart- 
ment that we had a thirty-six percent improvement." 
Captured by Plamen T.
33
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementJonah looks at his cigar, then extinguishes it in the ashtray. 
"Then you didn't really increase productivity," he says. 
I feel my smile freeze. 
"I'm not sure I understand," I say. 
Jonah leans forward conspiratorially and says, "Let me ask 
you something—just between us: Was your plant able to ship 
even one more product per day as a result of what happened in 
the department where you installed the robots?" 
I mumble, "Well, I'd have to check the numbers . . ." 
"Did you fire anybody?" he asks. 
I lean back, looking at him. What the hell does he mean by 
that? 
"You mean did we lay anybody off? Because we installed the 
robots?" I say. "No, we have an  understanding with our union 
that nobody will be laid off beca use of productivity improvement. 
We shifted the people to other jobs. Of course, when there's a 
business downturn, we lay people off." 
"But the robots themselves didn't reduce your plant's people 
expense," he says. 
"No," I admit. 
"Then, tell me, did your inventories go down?" asks Jonah. 
I chuckle. 
"Hey, Jonah, what is this?" I say to him. 
"Just tell me," he says. "Did inventories go down?" 
"Offhand, I have to say I don't think so. But I'd really have 
to check the numbers." 
"Check your numbers if you'd lik e," says Jonah. "But if your 
inventories haven't gone down . . . and your employee expense 
was not reduced . . . and if yo ur company isn't selling more 
products—which obviously it can't, if you're not shipping more of 
them—then you can't tell me these robots increased your plant's 
productivity." 
In the pit of my stomach, I'm getting this feeling like you'd 
probably have if you were in an elevator and the cable snapped. 
"Yeah, I see what you're saying, in a way," I tell him. "But 
my efficiencies went up , my costs went down—" 
"Did they?" asks Jonah. He closes his book. 
"Sure they did. In fact, those e fficiencies are averaging well 
above ninety percent. And my cost per part went down consider- 
ably. Let me tell you, to stay co mpetitive these days, we've got to 
do everything we can to be more efficient and reduce costs." 
Captured by Plamen T.
34
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementMy drink arrives; the waitress puts it on the table beside me. 
I hand her a ten and wait for her to give me the change. 
"With such high efficiencies, you must be running your ro- 
bots constantly," says Jonah. 
"Absolutely," I tell him. "We have to. Otherwise, we'd lose 
our savings on our cost per part. And efficiencies would go down. 
That applies not only to the robot s, but to our other production 
resources as well. We have to keep  producing to stay efficient and 
maintain our cost advantage." 
"Really?" he says. 
"Sure. Of course, that's not to say we don't have our prob- 
lems." 
"I see," says Jonah. Then he smiles. "Come on! Be honest. 
Your inventories are going through the roof, are they not?" 
I look at him. How does he know? 
"If you mean our work-in-process—" 
"All of your inventories," he says. 
"Well, it depends. Some pla ces, yes, they are high," I say. 
"And everything is always late ?" asks Jonah. "You can't ship 
anything on time?" 
"One thing I'll admit," I tell him, "is that we have a heck of a 
problem meeting shipping dates. It's a serious issue with custom- 
ers lately." 
Jonah nods, as if he had predicted it. 
"Wait a minute here . . . how come you know about these 
things?" I ask him. 
He smiles again. 
"Just a hunch," says Jonah. "B esides, I see those symptoms 
in a lot of the manufacturin g plants. You're not alone." 
I say, "But aren't you a physicist?" 
"I'm a scientist," he says. "And right now you could say I'm 
doing work in the science of organizations—manufacturing orga- 
nizations in particular." 
"Didn't know there was such a science." 
"There is now," he says. 
"Whatever it is you're into, you put your finger on a couple 
of my biggest problems, I have to give you that," I tell him. "How 
come—" 
I stop because Jonah is exclaiming something in Hebrew. 
He's reached into a pocket of hi s trousers to take out an old 
watch. 
Captured by Plamen T.
35
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Sorry, Alex, but I see I'm going to miss my plane if I don't 
hurry," he says. 
He stands up and reaches for his coat. 
"That's too bad," I say. "I'm kind of intrigued by a couple of 
things you've said." 
Jonah pauses. 
"Yes, well, if you could start to think about what we've been 
discussing, you probably could get your plant out of the trouble 
it's in." 
"Hey, maybe I gave you the wrong impression," I tell him. 
"We've got a few problems, but I wouldn't say the plant is in 
trouble."  
He looks me straight in the eye. He knows what's going on, 
I'm thinking. 
"But tell you what," I hear myself saying, "I've got some time 
to kill. Why don't I walk you down to your plane? Would you 
mind?" 
"No, not at all," he says. "But we have to hurry." 
I  g e t  u p  a n d  g r a b  m y  c o a t  a n d  b r i e f c a s e .  M y  d r i n k  i s  s i t t i n g  
there. I take a quick slurp off the top and abandon it. Jonah is 
already edging his way toward the door. He waits for me to catch 
u p  w i t h  h i m .  T h e n  t h e  t w o  o f  u s  step out into the corridor where 
people are rushing everywhere. Jonah sets off at a fast pace. It 
takes an effort to keep up with him. 
"I'm curious," I tell Jonah, "what made you suspect some- 
thing might be wrong with my plant?" 
"You told me yourself," Jonah says. 
"No, I didn't." 
"Alex," he says, "it was clear to me from your own words that 
you're not running as efficient a plant as you think you are. You 
are running exactly the opposite. You are running a very in-effi- 
cient plant." 
"Not according to the measurements," I tell him. "Are you 
trying to tell me my people are wrong in what they're reporting 
. . . that they're lying to me or something?" 
"No," he says. "It is very unlikely your people are lying to 
you. But your measurements definitely are." 
"Yeah, okay, sometimes we massage the numbers here and 
there. But everybody has to play that game." 
"You're missing the point," he says. "You think you're run- 
ning an efficient plant . . . but your thinking is wrong." 
Captured by Plamen T.
36
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"What's wrong with my thinking? It's no different from the 
thinking of most other managers." 
"Yes, exactly," says Jonah. 
"What's that supposed to mean?" I ask; I'm  beginning to feel 
somewhat insulted by this. 
"Alex, if you're like nearly everybody else in this world, 
you've accepted so many things without question that you're not 
really thinking at all," says Jonah. 
"Jonah, I'm thinking all the time," I tell him. "That's part of 
my job." 
He shakes his head. 
"Alex, tell me again why you believe your robots are such a 
great improvement." 
"Because they increased productivity," I say. 
"And what is productivity?" 
I think for a minute, try to remember. 
"According to the way my company is defining it," I tell him, 
'there's a formula you use, something about the value added per 
employee equals. . . ." 
Jonah is shaking his head again. 
"Regardless of how your company defines it, that is not what 
productivity really is," he says. "Forget for just a minute about the 
formulas and all that, and just te ll me in your own words, from 
your experience, what does it  mean to be productive?" 
We rush around a corner. In front of us, I see, are the metal 
detectors and the security guards. I had intended to stop and say 
d-bye to him here, but J onah doesn't slow down. 
"Just tell me, what does it mean to be productive?" he asks 
again as he walks through the metal detector. From the other side 
he calks to me. "To you personally, what does it mean?" 
I put my briefcase on the conveyor and follow him through. 
I'm wondering, what do es he want to hear? 
On the far side, I'm telling him, "Well, I guess it means that 
I'm accomplishing something." 
"Exactly!" he says. "But you are accomplishing something in 
terms of what?" 
"In terms of goals," I say. 
"Correct!" says Jonah. 
He reaches under his sweater into his shirt pocket and pulls 
out a cigar. He hands it to me.  
Captured by Plamen T.
37
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"My compliments," he says. "W hen you are productive you 
are accomplishing something in terms of your goal, right?" 
"Right," I say as I retrieve my briefcase. 
We're rushing past gate after gate. I'm trying to match Jonah 
stride for stride. 
And he's saying, "Alex, I have come to the conclusion that 
productivity is the act of bringi ng a company closer to its goal. 
Every action that brings a company closer to its goal is produc- 
tive. Every action that does not bring a company closer to its goal 
is not productive. Do you follow me?" 
"Yeah, but . . . really, Jonah, that's just simple common 
sense," I say to him. 
"It's simple logic is what it is," he says. 
We stop. I watch him hand his ticket across the counter. 
"But it's too simplified," I tell him. "It doesn't tell me any- 
thing. I mean, if I'm moving towa rd my goal I'm productive and 
if I'm not, then I'm not productive—so what?" 
"What I'm telling you is, productivity is meaningless unless 
you know what your goal is," he says. 
He takes his ticket and starts  to walk toward the gate. 
"Okay, then," I say. "You can look at it this way. One of my 
company's goals is to increase efficiencies. Therefore, whenever I 
increase efficiencies, I'm bein g productive. It's logical." 
Jonah stops dead. He turns to me. 
"Do you know what your problem is?" he asks me. 
"Sure," I say. "I need better efficiencies." 
"No, that is not your problem," he says. "Your problem is 
you don't know what the goal is. And, by the way, there is only 
one goal, no matter what the company." 
That stumps me for a second. Jonah starts walking toward 
the gate again. It seems everyone  else has now gone on board. 
Only the two of us are left in th e waiting area. I keep after him. 
"Wait a minute! What do you mean, I don't know what the 
goal is? I know what th e goal is," I tell him. 
By now, we're at the door of the plane. Jonah turns to me. 
The stewardess inside the cabin is looking at us. 
"Really? Then, tell me, what is the goal of your manufactur- 
ing organization?" he asks. 
"The goal is to produce products as efficiently as we can," I 
tell him. 
"Wrong," says Jonah. "That's not it. What is the real goal?"  
Captured by Plamen T.
38
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementI stare at him blankly. 
The stewardess leans through the door. 
"Are either of you going to board this aircraft?" 
Jonah says to her, "Just a second , please." Then he turns to 
me. "Come on, Alex! Quickly! Tell me the real goal, if you know 
what it is." 
"Power?" I suggest. 
He looks surprised. "Well . . . not bad, Alex. But you don't 
get power just by virtue of manufacturing something." 
The stewardess is pissed off. "Sir, if you're not getting on this 
aircraft, you have to go back to the terminal," she says coldly. 
Jonah ignores her. "Alex, you cannot understand the mean- 
ing of productivity unless you know  what the goal is. Until then, 
you're just playing a lot of games with numbers and words." 
"Okay, then it's market share," I tell him. "That's the goal." 
"Is it?" he asks. 
He steps into the plane. 
"Hey! Can't you tell me?" I call to him. 
"Think about it, Alex. You can find the answer with your 
own mind," he says. 
He hands the stewardess his ticket, looks at me and waves 
good-bye. I raise my hand to wave back and discover I'm still 
holding the cigar he gave me. I put it in my suit jacket pocket. 
When I look up again, he's gone. An impatient gate-agent ap- 
pears and tells me flatly she is going to close the door.  
Captured by Plamen T.
39
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement5 
It's a good cigar. 
For a connoisseur of tobacco, it might be a little dry, since it 
spent several weeks inside my suit jacket. But I sniff it with 
pleasure during Peach's big meeting, while I remember that 
other, stranger, meeting with Jonah. 
Or was it really more strange than this? Peach is up in front 
of us tapping the center of a gr aph with a long wood pointer. 
Smoke whirls slowly in the beam of the slide projector. Across 
from me, someone is poking earnes tly at a calculator. Everyone 
except me is listening intently, or jotting notes, or offering com- 
ments. 
". . . consistent parameters . . . essential to gain . . . ma- 
trix of advantage . . . extensive pre-profit recovery . . . opera- 
tional indices . . . provide tangential proof. . . ." 
I have no idea what's going on. Their words sound like a 
different language to me—not a foreign language exactly, but a 
language I once knew and only vaguely now recall. The terms 
seem familiar to me. But now I'm not sure what they really mean. 
They are just words. 
You're just playing a lot of games with numbers and words.  
For a few minutes there in Ch icago's O'Hare, I did try to 
think about what Jonah had said. He'd made a lot of sense to me 
somehow; he'd had some good points. But it was like somebody 
from a different world had talked to me. I had to shrug it off. I 
had to go to Houston and talk about robots. It was time to catch 
my own plane. 
Now I'm wondering if Jonah might be closer to the truth 
than I first thought. Because as I glance from face to face, I get 
this gut hunch that none of us here has anything more than a 
witch doctor's understanding of the medicine we're practicing. 
Our tribe is dying and we're dancing in our ceremonial smoke to 
exorcise the devil that's ailing us. 
What is the real goal? Nobody here has even asked anything 
that basic. Peach is chanting about cost opportunities and "pro- 
ductivity" targets and so on. Hilton Smyth is saying hallelujah to 
whatever Peach proclaims. Does anyone genuinely understand 
what we're doing?  
Captured by Plamen T.
40
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementAt ten o'clock, Peach calls a break. Everyone except me exits 
for the rest rooms or for coffee. I stay seated until they are out of 
the room. 
What the hell am I doing here? I'm wondering what good it 
is for me—or any of us—to be sitting here in this room. Is this 
meeting (which is scheduled to last  for most of the day) going to 
make my plant competitive, save  my job, or help anybody do 
anything of benefit to anyone? 
I can't handle it. I don't even know what productivity is. So 
how can this be anything except a total waste? And with that 
thought I find myself stuffing my papers back into my briefcase. I 
snap it closed. And then I qui etly get up and walk out. 
I'm lucky at first. I make it to the elevator without anyone 
saying anything to me. But while  I'm waiting there, Hilton Smyth 
comes strolling past. 
"You're not bailing out on us , are you Al?" he asks. 
For a second, I consider ignoring the question. But then I 
realize Smyth might deliberatel y say something to Peach. 
"Have to," I say to him. "I've got a situation that needs my 
attention back at the plant." 
"What? An emergency?" 
"You can call it that." 
The elevator opens its doors. I step in. Smyth is looking at 
me with a quizzical expression as he walks by. The doors close. 
It crosses my mind that there is a risk of Peach firing me for 
walking out of his meeting. But that, to my current frame of 
mind as I walk through the garage to my car, would only shorten 
three months of anxiety leading up to what I suspect might be 
inevitable. 
I don't go back to the plant right away. I drive around for a 
while. I point the car down one road and follow it until I'm tired 
of it, then take another road. A couple of hours pass. I don't care 
where I am; I just want to be out. The freedom is kind of exhila- 
rating until it gets boring. 
As I'm driving, I try to keep my mind off business. I try to 
clear my head. The day has turned out to be nice. The sun is out. 
It's warm. No clouds. Blue sky. Even though the land still has an 
early spring austerity, everything yellow-brown, it's a good day to 
be playing hooky. 
I remember looking at my watch just before I reach the plant 
Captured by Plamen T.
41
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementgates and seeing that it's past 1 P.M. I'm slowing down to make the 
turn through the gate, when—I d on't know how else to say it—it 
just doesn't feel right. I look at the plant. And I put my foot down 
on the gas and keep going. I'm hungry; I'm thinking maybe I 
should get some lunch. 
But I guess the real reason is I just don't want to be found 
yet. I need to think and I'll never be able to do it if I go back to 
the office now. 
Up the road about a mile is a little pizza place. I see they're 
open, so I stop and go in. I'm c onservative; I get a medium pizza 
with double cheese, pepperoni, sa usage, mushrooms, green pep- 
pers, hot peppers, black o lives and onion, and—mmmmmmmm 
—a sprinkling of anchovies. While I'm waiting, I can't resist the 
Munchos on the stand by the cash register, and I tell the Sicilian 
who runs the place to put me down for a couple of bags of beer 
nuts, some taco chips, and—for  later—some pretzels. Trauma 
whets my appetite. 
But there's one problem. You just  can't wash down beer nuts 
with soda. You need beer. And gue ss what I see in the cooler. Of 
course, I don't usually drink during the day . . . but I look at 
the way the light is hitting th ose frosty cold cans. . . . 
"Screw it." 
I pull out a six of Bud. 
Twenty-three dollars and sixty-tw o cents and I'm out of there. 
Just before the plant, on the opposite side of the highway, 
there is a gravel road leading up a low hillside. It's an access road 
to a substation about half a mile aw ay. So on impulse, I turn the 
wheel sharply. The Mazda goes bou ncing off the highway onto the 
gravel and only a fast hand save s my pizza from the floor. We 
raise some dust getting to the top. 
I park the car, unbutton my shirt,  take off my tie and coat to 
save them from the inevitable , and open up my goodies. 
Some distance below, down across  the highway, is my plant. 
It sits in a field, a big gray st eel box without windows. Inside, I 
know, there are about 400 people at work on day shift. Their cars 
are parked in the lot. I watch as a truck backs between two others 
sitting at the unloading docks. The trucks bring the materials 
which the machines and people inside will use to make some- 
thing. On the opposite side, more trucks are being filled with 
what they have produced. In simplest terms, that's what's hap- 
pening. I'm supposed to manage  what goes on down there. 
Captured by Plamen T.
42
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementI pop the top on one of the beers and go to work on the 
pizza. 
The plant has the look of a landmark. It's as if it has always 
been there, as if it will always  be there. I happen to know the 
plant is only about fifteen years old. And it may not be here as 
many years from now. 
So what is the goal? 
What are we supposed to be doing here? 
What keeps this place working? 
Jonah said there was only one goal. Well, I don't see how that 
can be. We do a lot of things in the course of daily operations, and 
they're all important. Most of them anyway ... or we wouldn't 
do them. What the hell, they all could be goals. 
I mean, for instance, one of th e things a manufacturing orga- 
nization must do is buy raw materials. We need these materials in 
o r d e r  t o  m a n u f a c t u r e ,  a n d  w e  h a v e  t o  o b t a i n  t h e m  a t  t h e  b e s t  
cost, and so purchasing in a cost-effective manner is very impor- 
tant to us. 
The pizza, by the way, is pr imo. I'm chowing down on my 
second piece when some tiny voice inside my head asks me, But is 
this the goal? Is cost-effective purchasing the reason for the 
plant's existence? 
I have to laugh. I almost choke. 
Yeah, right. Some of the brilliant idiots in Purchasing sure do 
act as if that's the goal. They're out there renting warehouses to 
store all the crap they're buying so cost-effectively. What is it we 
have now? A thirty-two-month supply of copper wire? A seven- 
month inventory of stainless steel sheet? All kinds of stuff. 
They've got millions and millions tied up in what they've bought 
—and at terrific prices. 
No, put it that way, and economical purchasing is definitely 
not the goal of this plant. 
What else do we do? We employ people—by the hundreds 
here, and by the tens of thousands throughout UniCo. We, the 
people, are supposed to be UniCo's "most important asset," as 
some P.R. flack worded it once in the annual report. Brush off 
the bull and it is true the company couldn't function without 
good people of variou s skills and professions. 
I personally am glad it provides jobs. There is a lot to be said 
for a steady paycheck. But supplyi ng jobs to people surely isn't 
Captured by Plamen T.
43
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementwhy the plant exists. After all, how many people have we laid off 
so far? 
And anyway, even if UniCo offered lifetime employment like 
some of the Japanese companies, I still couldn't say the goal is 
jobs. A lot of people seem to think and act as if that were the goal 
(empire-building department managers and politicians just to 
name two), but the plant wasn't built for the purpose of paying 
wages and giving people something to do. 
Okay, so why was the plant built in the first place? 
It was built to produce products. Why can't that be the goal? 
Jonah said it wasn't. But I don't see why it isn't the goal. We're a 
manufacturing company. That means we have to manufacture 
something, doesn't it? Isn't that the whole point, to produce 
products? Why else are we here? 
I think about some of the buzzwor ds I've been hearing lately. 
What about quality? 
Maybe that's it. If you don't manufacture a quality product 
all you've got at the end is a bunch of expensive mistakes. You 
have to meet the customer's re quirements with a quality product, 
or before long you won't have a business. UniCo learned its les- 
son on that point. 
But we've already learned that lesson. We've implemented a 
major effort to improve quality. Why isn't the plant's future se- 
cure? And if quality were truly the goal, then how come a com- 
pany like Rolls Royce very nearly went bankrupt? 
Quality alone cannot be the goal . It's important. But it's not 
the goal. Why? Because of costs? 
If low-cost production is essential, then efficiency would 
seem to be the answer. Okay . . . maybe it's the two of them 
together: quality and efficiency. They do tend to go hand-in- 
hand. The fewer errors made, the less re-work you have to do, 
which can lead to lower costs and so on. Maybe that's what Jonah 
meant. 
Producing a quality product efficiently: that must be the 
goal. It sure sounds good. "Q uality and efficiency." Those are 
two nice words. Kind of like "Mom and apple pie." 
I sit back and pop the top on another beer. The pizza is now 
just a fond memory. For a few moments I feel satisfied. 
But something isn't sitting right. And it's more than just indi- 
gestion from lunch. To efficiently produce quality products 
Captured by Plamen T.
44
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementsounds like a good goal. But can that goal keep the plant work- 
ing? 
I'm bothered by some of the examples that come to mind. If 
the goal is to produce a quality product efficiently, then how 
come Volkswagen isn't still ma king Bugs? That was a quality 
product that could be produced at low cost. Or, going back a 
ways, how come Douglas didn't keep making DC-3's? From ev- 
erything I've heard, the DC-3 was a fine aircraft. I'll bet if they 
had kept making them, they coul d turn them out today a lot 
more efficiently than DC-10's. 
It's not enough to turn out a quality product on an efficient 
basis. The goal has to be something else. 
But what? 
As I drink my beer, I find my self contemplating the smooth 
finish of the aluminum beer can I hold in my hand. Mass produc- 
tion technology really is something.  To think that this can until 
recently was a rock in the grou nd. Then we come along with 
some know-how and some tools and turn the rock into a light- 
weight, workable metal that you can use over and over again. It's 
pretty amazing— 
Wait a minute, I'm thinking. That's it! 
Technology: that's really what it 's all about. We have to stay 
on the leading edge of technology. It's essential to the company. 
If we don't keep pace with technology, we're finished. So that's 
the goal. 
Well, on second thought . . . that isn't right. If technology 
is the real goal of a manufactur ing organization, then how come 
the most responsible positions aren't in research and develop- 
ment? How come R&D is always off to the side in every organiza- 
tion chart I've ever seen? And suppose we did have the latest of 
every kind of machine we could use—would it save us? No, it 
wouldn't. So technology is im portant, but it isn't the goal. 
Maybe the goal is some combination of efficiency, quality and 
technology. But then I'm back to saying we have a lot of impor- 
tant goals. And that really isn't saying anything, aside from the 
fact that it doesn't square with what Jonah told me. 
I'm stumped. 
I gaze down the hillside. In fr ont of the big steel box of the 
plant there is a smaller box of glass and concrete which houses 
the offices. Mine is the office on th e front left corner. Squinting at 
Captured by Plamen T.
45
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementit, I can almost see the stack of phone messages my secretary is 
bringing in my wheelbarrow. 
Oh well. I lift my beer for a good  long slug. And as I tilt my 
head back, I see them. 
Out beyond the plant are two other long, narrow buildings. 
They're our warehouses. They're filled to the roof with spare 
parts and unsold merchandise we haven't been able to unload 
yet. Twenty million dollars in finished-goods inventory: quality 
products of the most current tec hnology, all produced efficiently, 
all sitting in their boxes, all sealed in plastic with the warranty 
cards and a whiff of the original factory air—and all waiting for 
someone to buy them. 
So that's it. UniCo obviously doesn't run this plant just to fill 
a warehouse. The goal is sales. 
But if the goal is sales, why didn't Jonah accept market share 
as the goal? Market share is even more important as a goal than 
sales. If you have the highest market share, you've got the best 
sales in your industry. Capture the market and you've got it 
made. Don't you? 
Maybe not. I remember the old line, "We're losing money, 
b u t  w e ' r e  g o i n g  t o  m a k e  i t  u p  w i t h  v o l u m e . "  A  c o m p a n y  w i l l  
sometimes sell at a loss or at a small amount over cost—as UniCo 
has been known to do—just to unl oad inventories. You can have a 
big share of the market, but if you're not making money, who 
cares? 
Money. Well, of course . . . money is the big thing. Peach is 
going to shut us down because the plant is costing the company 
too much money. So I have to find ways to reduce the money that 
the company is losing. . . . 
Wait a minute. Suppose I did some incredibly brilliant thing 
and stemmed the losses so we br oke even. Would that save us? 
Not in the long run, it wouldn't. The plant wasn't built just so it 
could break even. UniCo is not in  business just so it can break 
even. The company exis ts to make money. 
I see it now. 
The goal of a manufacturing organization is to make money. 
Why else did J. Bartholomew Granby start his company back 
i n  1 8 8 1  a n d  g o  t o  m a r k e t  w i t h  h i s  i m p r o v e d  c o a l  s t o v e ?  W a s  i t  f o r  
the love of appliances? Was it a magnanimous public gesture to 
bring warmth and comfort to million s? Hell, no. Old J. Bart did it 
to make a bundle. And he su cceeded—because the stove was a 
Captured by Plamen T.
46
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementgem of a product in its day. And then investors gave him more 
money so they could make a bundle  and J. Bart could make an 
even bigger one. 
But is making money the only goal? What are all these other 
things I've been worrying about? 
I reach for my briefcase, take out a yellow legal pad and take 
a pen from my coat pocket. Then I make a list of all the items 
people think of as being goals: cost-effective purchasing, employ- 
ing good people, high technolog y, producing products, produc- 
ing quality products, selling qualit y products, capturing market 
share. I even add some others like communications and customer 
satisfaction. 
All of those are essential to running the business successfully. 
What do they all do? They enable the company to make money. 
But they are not the goals themse lves; they're just the means of 
achieving the goal. 
How do I know for sure? 
Well, I don't. Not absolutely. But adopting "making money" 
as the goal of a manufacturing organization looks like a pretty 
good assumption. Because, for one thing, there isn't one item on 
that list that's worth a damn if the company isn't making money. 
Because what happens if a comp any doesn't make money? If 
the company doesn't make money by producing and selling 
products, or by maintenance contra cts, or by selling some of its 
assets, or by some other means . . . the company is finished. It 
will cease to function. Money mu st be the goal. Nothing else 
works in its place. Anyway, it's the one assumption I have to 
make. 
If the goal is to make money, then (putting it in terms Jonah 
might have used), an action that moves us toward making money 
is productive. And an action that takes away from making money 
is non-productive. For the past year or more, the plant has been 
m o v i n g  a w a y  f r o m  t h e  g o a l  m o r e  t h a n  t o w a r d  i t .  S o  t o  s a v e  t h e  
plant, I have to make it produc tive; I have to make the plant 
make money for UniCo. That's a simplified statement of what's 
happening, but it's accurate. At le ast it's a logical starting point. 
Through the windshield, the wo rld is bright and cold. The 
sunlight seems to have become much more intense. I look 
around as if I have just come ou t of a long trance. Everything is 
familiar, but seems new to me. I ta ke my last swallow of beer. I 
suddenly feel I have to get going.  
Captured by Plamen T.
47
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement6 
B y  m y  w a t c h ,  i t ' s  a b o u t  4 : 3 0  w h e n  I  p a r k  t h e  M a z d a  i n  t h e  
plant lot. One thing I've effectiv ely managed today is to evade the 
office. I reach for my briefcase and get out of the car. The glass 
box of the office in front of me is silent as death. Like an ambush. 
I know they're all inside waitin g for me, waiting to pounce. I 
decide to disappoint everyone. I decide to take a detour through 
the plant. I just want to ta ke a fresh look at things. 
I walk down to a door into the plant and go inside. From my 
briefcase, I get the safety glasses I always carry. There is a rack of 
hard hats by one of the desks over by the wall. I steal one from 
there, put it on, and walk inside. 
As I round a corner and enter one  of the work areas, I hap- 
pen to surprise three guys sitti ng on a bench in one of the open 
bays. They're sharing a newspaper, reading and talking with each 
other. One of them sees me. He nudges the others. The newspa- 
per is folded away with the grace of a snake disappearing in the 
grass. All three of them nonchalantly become purposeful and go 
off in three separate directions. 
I might have walked on by anot her time. But today it makes 
me mad. Dammit, the hourly people know this plant is in trouble. 
With the layoffs we've had, they have to know. You'd think they'd 
all try to work harder to save th is place. But here we've got three 
guys, all of them making probably ten or twelve bucks an hour, 
sitting on their asses. I go and find their supervisor. 
After I tell him that three of his people are sitting around 
with nothing to do, he gives me  some excuse about how they're 
mostly caught up on their quotas and they're waiting for more 
parts. 
So I tell him, "If you can't k eep them working, I'll find a 
department that can. Now find something for them to do. You 
use your people, or lose 'em—you got it?" 
From down the aisle, I look over my shoulder. The super 
now has the three guys moving so me materials from one side of 
the aisle to the other. I know it's probably just something to keep 
them busy, but what the hell; at least those guys are working. If I 
hadn't said something, who knows how long they'd have sat 
there? 
Captured by Plamen T.
48
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementThen it occurs to me: those three guys are doing something 
now, but is that going to help us make money? They might be 
working, but are they productive? 
For a moment, I consider going back and telling the supervi- 
sor to make those guys actually produce. But, well . . . maybe 
there really isn't anything for them to work on right now. And 
even though I could perhaps have those guys shifted to some- 
place where they could produce, how  w o u l d  I  k n o w  i f  t h a t  w o r k  
is helping us make money? 
That's a weird thought. 
Can I assume that making people work and making money 
are the same thing? We've tended to do that in the past. The basic 
rule has been just keep everybody and everything out here work- 
ing all the time; keep pushing that product out the door. And 
when there isn't any work to do , make some. And when we can't 
make work, shift people around. And when you still can't make 
them work, lay them off. 
I look around and most people are working. Idle people in 
here are the exception. Just about everybody is working nearly all 
the time. And we're not making money. 
Some stairs zig-zag up one of the walls, access to one of the 
overhead cranes. I climb them unt il I am halfway to the roof and 
can look out over the plant from one of the landings. 
Every moment, lots and lots of  things are happening down 
there. Practically everything I'm seeing is a variable. The com- 
plexity in this plant—in any manufacturing plant—is mind-bog- 
gling if you contemplate it. Situations on the floor are always 
changing. How can I possibly control what goes on? How the hell 
am I supposed to know if any acti on in the plant is productive or 
non-productive toward making money? 
The answer is supposed to be in  my briefcase, which is heavy 
in my hand. It's filled with all those reports and printouts and 
stuff that Lou gave me for the meeting. 
We do have lots of measurements that are supposed to tell us 
if we're productive. But what they really tell us are things like 
whether somebody down there "worked" for all the hours we 
paid him or her to work. They tell us whether the output per 
hour met our standard for the job. They tell us the "cost of prod- 
ucts," they tell us "direct labor variances," all that stuff. But how 
do I really know if what happens here is making money for us, or 
Captured by Plamen T.
49
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementwhether we're just playing acco unting games? There must be a 
connection, but how do I define it? 
I shuffle back down the stairs. 
Maybe I should just dash off a blistering memo on the evil of 
reading newspapers on the job. Th ink that'll put us back in the 
black? 
By the time I finally set foot inside my office, it is past five 
o'clock and most of the people who might have been waiting for 
me are gone. Fran was probably one of the first ones out the 
door. But she has left me all their messages. I can barely see the 
phone under them. Half of the messages seem to be from Bill 
Peach. I guess he caught my disappearing act. 
With reluctance, I pick up the phone and dial his number. 
But God is merciful. It rings for a straight two minutes; no an- 
swer. I breathe quietly and hang up. 
Sitting back in my chair, looking out at the reddish-gold of 
late afternoon, I keep thinking  about measurements, about all the 
ways we use to evaluate perfor mance: meeting schedules and due 
dates, inventory turns, total sales, total expenses. Is there a sim- 
plified way to know if we're making money? 
There is a soft knock at the door. 
I turn. It's Lou. 
As I mentioned earlier, Lou is the plant controller. He's a 
paunchy, older man who is about two years away from retire- 
ment. In the best accountants' tradition, he wears horn-rimmed 
bifocal glasses. Even though he dresses in expensive suits, some- 
how he always seems to look a li ttle frumpled. He came here from 
corporate about twenty years ago. His hair is snow white. I think 
his reason for living is to go to  the CPA conventions and bust 
loose. Most of the time, he's very mild-mannered—until you try 
to put something over on him. Then he turns into Godzilla. 
"Hi," he says from the door. 
I roll my hand, motioning him to come in. 
"Just wanted to mention to you that Bill Peach called this 
afternoon," says Lou. "Weren't you supposed to be in a meeting 
with him today?" 
"What did Bill want?" I ask, ignoring the question. 
"He needed some updates on some figures," he says. "He 
seemed kind of miffed that you weren't here." 
"Did you get him what he needed?" I ask.  
Captured by Plamen T.
50
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Yeah, most of it," Lou says. "I sent it to him; he should get it 
in the morning. Most of it was like the stuff I gave you." 
"What about the rest?" 
"Just a few things I have to pull together," he says. "I should 
have it sometime tomorrow." 
"Let me see it before it goes, okay?" I say. "Just so I know." 
"Oh, sure," says Lou. 
"Hey, you got a minute?" 
"Yeah, what's up?" he asks, probably expecting me to give 
him the rundown on what's goin g on between me and Peach. 
"Sit down," I tell him. 
Lou pulls up a chair. 
I think for a second, trying to phrase this correctly. Lou waits 
rxpectantly. 
"This is just a simple, fundamental question," I say. 
Lou smiles. "Those are the kind I like." 
"Would you say the goal of this  company is to make money?" 
He bursts out laughing. 
"Are you kidding?" he asks. "Is this a trick question?" 
"No, just tell me." 
"Of course it's to make money!" he says. 
I repeat it to him: "So the go al of the company is to make 
money, right?" 
"Yeah," he says. "We have to  produce products, too." 
"Okay, now wait a minute," I tell him. "Producing products 
a just a means to achieve the goal." 
I run through the basic line of reasoning with him. He lis- 
tens. He's a fairly bright guy, Lou. You don't have to explain 
ery little thing to him. At the end of it all, he agrees with me. 
"So what are you driving at?" 
"How do we know if we're making money?" 
"Well, there are a lot of ways," he says. 
For the next few minutes, Lou goes on about total sales, and 
market share, and profitability, and dividends paid to stockhold- 
ers, and so on. Finally, I hold up my hand. 
"Let me put it this way," I say. "Suppose you're going to re- 
.-. rite the textbooks. Suppose you don't have all those terms and 
vou have to make them up as you go along. What would be the 
minimum number of measurements you would need in order to 
know if we are making money?"  
Captured by Plamen T.
51
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementLou puts a finger alongside his face and squints through his 
bifocals at his shoe . 
"Well, you'd have to have some kind of absolute measure- 
ment," he says. "Something to tell you in dollars or yen or what- 
ever just how much money you've made." 
"Something like net profit, right?" I ask. 
"Yeah, net profit," he says. "But you'd need more than just 
that. Because an absolute measurement isn't going to tell you 
much." 
"Oh yeah?" I say. "If I know how much money I've made, 
why do I need to know anything else? You follow me? If I add up 
what I've made, and I subtract my expenses, and I get my net 
profit—what else do I need to know? I've made, say, $10 million, 
or $20 million, or whatever." 
For a fraction of a second, Lou gets a glint in his eye like I'm 
real dumb. 
"All right," he says. "Let's say you figure it out and you come 
up with $10 million net profit ... an absolute measurement. 
Offhand, that sounds like a lot of money, like you really raked it 
in. But how much did you start with?" 
He pauses for effect. 
"You see? How much did it take to make that $10 million? 
Was it just a million dollars? Then you made ten times more 
money than you invested. Ten to one. That's pretty goddamned 
good. But let's say you invested a billion dollars. And you only 
made a lousy ten million bu cks? That's pretty bad." 
"Okay, okay," I say. "I was just asking to be sure." 
"So you need a relative measurement, too," Lou continues. 
"You need something like return on investment . . . ROI, some 
comparison of the money made re lative to the money invested." 
"All right, but with those two, we ought to be able to tell how 
well the company is doing overall, shouldn't we?" I ask. 
Lou nearly nods, then he  gets a faraway look. 
"Well. . . ." he says. 
I think about it too. 
"You know," he says, "it is possible for a company to show 
net profit and a good ROI and still go bankrupt." 
"You mean if it runs out of cash," I say. 
"Exactly," he says. "Bad cash flow is what kills most of the 
businesses that go under." 
"So you have to count cash flow as a third measurement?" 
Captured by Plamen T.
52
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementHe nods. 
"Yeah, but suppose you've got enough cash coming in every 
month to meet expenses for a year," I tell him. "If you've got 
enough of it, then cash flow doesn't matter." 
"But if you don't, nothing else matters," says Lou. "It's a 
measure of survival: stay above the line and you're okay; go below 
and you're dead." 
We look each other in the eye. 
"It's happening to us, isn't it?" Lou asks. 
I nod. 
Lou looks away. He's quiet. 
Then he says, "I knew it was coming. Just a matter of time." 
He pauses. He looks back to me. 
"What about us?" he asks. "Did Peach say anything?" 
"They're thinking about closing us down." 
"Will there be a consolidation?" he asks. 
What he's really asking is whether he'll have a job. 
"I honestly don't know, Lou," I tell him. "I imagine some 
people might be transferred to other plants or other divisions, 
but we didn't get into those kinds of specifics." 
Lou takes a cigarette out of the pack in his shirt pocket. I 
watch him stamp the end of it repe atedly on the arm of his chair. 
"Two lousy years to go before  retirement," he mutters. 
"Hey, Lou," I say, trying to lift him out of despair, "the worst 
it would probably mean for you would be an early retirement." 
"Dammit!" he says. "I don't want an early retirement!" 
We're both quiet for some time. Lou lights his cigarette. We 
sit there. 
Finally I say, "Look, I haven't given up yet." 
"Al, if Peach says we're finished—" 
"He didn't say that. We've still got time." 
"How much?" he asks. 
"Three months," I say. 
He all but laughs. "Forget it, Al. We'll never make it." 
"I said I'm not giving up. Okay?" 
For a minute, he doesn't say anything. I sit there knowing 
I'm not sure if I'm telling him the truth. All I've been able to do 
so far is figure out that we have to make the plant make money. 
Fine, Rogo, now how do we do it? I hear Lou blow a heavy breath 
of smoke. 
Captured by Plamen T.
53
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementWith resignation in his voice, he says, "Okay, Al. I'll give you 
all the help I can. But. ..." 
He leaves the sentence unfinished, waves his hand in the air. 
"I'm going to need that help, Lou," I tell him. "And the first 
thing I need from you is to keep all this to yourself for the time 
being. If the word gets out, we won't be able to get anyone to lift a 
finger around here." 
"Okay, but you know this won't stay a secret for long," he 
says. 
I know he's right. 
"So how do you plan on savi ng this place?" Lou asks. 
"The first thing I'm trying to do is get a clear picture of what 
we have to do to stay  in business," I say. 
"Oh, so that's what all this stuff with the measurements is 
about," he says. "Listen, Al, don't waste your time with all that. 
The system is the system. You want  to know what's wrong? I'll tell 
you what the problem is." 
And he does. For about an hour. Mo st of it I've heard before, 
it's the kind of thing everybody's heard: It's all the union's fault; 
if everybody would just work har der; nobody gives a damn about 
quality; look at foreign labor—w e can't compete on costs alone; 
and so on, and so on. He even tells me what sorts of self- 
flagellation we should administ er in order to chasten our- 
selves. Mostly Lou is blowing off steam. That's why I let him 
talk. 
But I sit there wondering. Lou actually is a bright guy. We're 
all fairly bright; UniCo has lots of bright, well-educated people on 
the payroll. And I sit here listening to Lou pronounce his opin- 
ions, which all sound good as they roll off his tongue, and I won- 
der why it is that we're slipping  minute by minute toward obliv- 
ion, if we're really so smart. 
Sometime after the sun has set, Lou decides to go home. I 
stay. After Lou has gone, I sit there at my desk with a pad of 
paper in front of me. On the paper, I write down the three mea- 
surements which Lou and I agreed are central to knowing if the 
company is making money: net profit, ROI and cash flow. 
I try to figure out if there is one of those three measurements 
which can be favored at the expense of the other two and allow 
me to pursue the goal. From ex perience, I happen to know there 
are a lot of games the people at the top can play. They can make 
Captured by Plamen T.
54
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementthe organization deliver a bigger ne t profit this year at the ex- 
pense of net profit in years to come (don't fund any R&D, for 
instance; that kind of thing). They can make a bunch of no-risk 
decisions and have any one of those measurements look great 
while the others stink. Aside from that, the ratios between the 
three might have to vary accordin g to the needs of the business. 
But then I sit back. 
If I were J. Bart Granby III sitting high atop my company's 
corporate tower, and if my control over the company were se- 
cure, I wouldn't want to play any of those games. I wouldn't want 
to see one measurement increase while the other two were ig- 
nored. I would want to see increases in net profit and return on 
investment and cash flow—all three of them. And I would want to 
see all three of them increase all the time. 
Man, think of it. We'd really be making money if we could 
have all of the measurements go  up simultaneously and forever. 
So this is the goal: 
To make money by increasing net profit, while simultane- 
ously increasing return on investment, and simultaneously in- 
creasing cash flow. 
I write that down in front of me. 
I feel like I'm on a roll now. Th e pieces seem to be fitting 
together. I have found one clear-cu t goal. I've worked out three 
related measurements to evaluate progress toward the goal. And 
I have come to the conclusion that  simultaneous increases in all 
three measurements are what we ou ght to be trying to achieve. 
Not bad for a day's work. I thin k Jonah would be proud of me. 
Now then, I ask myself, how do I build a direct connection 
between the three measurements and what goes on in my plant? 
If I can find some logical rela tionship between our daily opera- 
tions and the overall performance of the company then I'll have a 
basis for knowing if something is productive or non-productive 
. . . moving toward the goal or away from it. 
I go to the window and stare into the blackness. 
Half an hour later, it is as dark in my mind as it is outside the 
window. 
Running through my head are ideas about profit margins 
and capital investments and direct labor content, and it's all very 
conventional. It's the same basic line of thinking  everyone has 
been following for a hundred years. If I follow it, I'll come to the 
Captured by Plamen T.
55
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementsame conclusions as everyone el se and that means I'll have no 
truer understanding of what's  going on than I do now. 
I'm stuck. 
I turn away from the window. Behind my desk is a bookcase; 
I pull out a textbook, flip throug h it, put it back, pull out an- 
other, flip through it, put it back. 
Finally, I've had it. It's late. 
I check my watch—and I'm shocke d. It's past ten o'clock. All 
of a sudden, I realize I never called Julie to let her know I wasn't 
going to be home for dinner. She's really going to be pissed off at 
me; she always is when I don't call. 
I pick up the phone and dial. Julie answers. 
"Hi," I say. "Guess who had a rotten day." 
"Oh? So what else is new?" sh e says. "It so happens my day 
wasn't too hot either." 
"Okay, then we both had rotten days," I tell her. "Sorry I 
didn't call before. I got wr apped up in something." 
Long pause. 
"Well, I couldn't get a babysitter anyway," she says. 
Then it dawns on me; our postponed night out was sup- 
posed to be tonight. 
"I'm sorry, Julie. I really am. It just completely slipped my 
mind," I tell her. 
"I made dinner," she says. "When you hadn't shown up after 
two hours, we ate without you. Yo urs is in the microwave if you 
want it." 
"Thanks." 
"Remember your daughter? The lit tle girl who's in love with 
you?" Julie asks. 
"You don't have to be sarcastic." 
"She waited by the front window for you all evening until I 
made her go to bed." 
I shut my eyes. 
"Why?" I ask. 
"She's got a surprise to show you," says Julie. 
I say, "Listen, I'll be home in about an hour." 
"No rush," says Julie. 
She hangs up before I can say good-bye. 
Indeed, there is no point in rushing home at this stage of the 
game. I get my hard hat and glasses and take a walk out into the 
Captured by Plamen T.
56
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementplant to pay a visit to Eddie, my  second shift supervisor, and see 
how everything is going. 
When I get there, Eddie is not in his office; he's out dealing 
with something on the floor. I hav e him paged. Finally, I see him 
coming from way down at the other end of the plant. I watch him 
as he walks down. It's  a five-minute wait. 
Something about Eddie has always  irritated me. He's a com- 
petent supervisor. Not outstanding,  but he's okay. His work is not 
what bothers me. It's something else. 
I watch Eddie's steady gait. Each step is very regular. 
Then it hits me. That's what irritates me about Eddie: it's the 
way he walks. Well, it's more than that; Eddie's walk is symbolic of 
the kind of person he is. He walks a little bit pigeon-toed. It's as if 
he's literally walking a straight and narrow line. His hands cross 
stiffly in front of him, seeming to point at each foot. And he does 
all this like he read in a manual someplace that this is how walk- 
ing is supposed to be done. 
As he approaches, I'm thinking that Eddie has probably 
never done anything improper in his entire life—unless it was 
expected of him. Call him Mr. Regularity. 
We talk about some of the orde rs going through. As usual, 
everything is out of control. Eddie, of course, doesn't realize this. 
To him, everything is normal. And if  it's normal, it must be right. 
He's telling me—in elaborate detail—about what is running 
tonight. Just for the hell of it, I feel like asking Eddie to define 
what he's doing tonight in term s of something like net profit. 
I want to ask him, "Say, Eddie, how's our impact on ROI 
been in the last hour? By the way,  what's your shift done to im- 
prove cash flow? Are we making money?" 
It's not that Eddie hasn't heard of those terms. It's just that 
those concerns are not part of his world. His world is one mea- 
sured in terms of parts per hour,  man-hours worked, numbers of 
orders filled. He knows labor standards, he knows scrap factors, 
he knows run times, he knows shipping dates. Net profit, ROI, 
cash flow-—that's just headquarters talk to Eddie. It's absurd to 
think I could measure Eddie's world by those three. For Eddie, 
there is only a vague association between what happens on his 
shift and how much money the company makes. Even if I could 
open Eddie's mind to the greater universe, it would still be very 
difficult to draw a clear connect ion between the values here on 
Captured by Plamen T.
57
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementthe plant floor and the values on the many floors of UniCo head- 
quarters. They're too different. 
In the middle of a sentence, E ddie notices I'm looking at him 
funny. 
"Something wrong?" asks Eddie.  
Captured by Plamen T.
58
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement7 
When I get home, the house is dark except for one light. I 
try to keep it quiet as I come in. True to her word, Julie has left 
me some dinner in the microwave. As I open the door to see what 
delectable treat awaits me (it seems to be some variety of mystery 
meat) I hear a rustling behind me. I turn around, and there 
stands my little girl, Sharon, at the edge of the kitchen. 
"Well! If it isn't Miz Muffet!" I exclaim. "How is the tuffet 
these days?" 
She smiles. "Oh .  . . not bad." 
"How come you're up so late?" I ask. 
She comes forward holding a manila envelope. I sit down at 
the kitchen table and put her on my knee. She hands the enve- 
lope to me to open. 
"It's my report card," she says. 
"No kidding?" 
"You have to look at it," she tells me. 
And I do. 
"You got all A's!" I say. 
I give her a squeeze and big kiss. 
"That's terrific!" I tell her. "That's very good, Sharon. I'm 
really proud of you. And Til bet you were the only kid in your 
class to do this well." 
She nods. Then she has to tell me everything. I let her go on, 
and half an hour later, she's barely able to keep her eyes open. I 
carry her up to her bed. 
But tired as I am, I can't sleep. It's past midnight now. I sit in 
the kitchen, brooding and picking at dinner. My kid is getting A's 
in the second grade while Tin flunking out in business. 
Maybe I should just give up, use what time I've got to try to 
land another job. According to what Selwin said, that's what ev- 
eryone at headquarters is doin g. Why should I be different? 
For a while, I try to convince my self that a call to a head- 
hunter is the smart thing to do. But,  in the end, I can't. A job with 
another company would get Julie and  me out of town, and maybe 
fortune would bring me an even better position than I've got now 
although I doubt it; my track r ecord as a plant manager hasn't 
Captured by Plamen T.
59
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementexactly been stellar.) What turns me against the idea of looking 
for another job is I'd feel I were running away. And I just can't do 
that. 
It's not that I feel I owe my life to the plant or the town or 
the company, but I do feel some  responsibility. And aside from 
that, I've invested a big chunk of  my life in UniCo. I want that 
investment to pay off. Three months is better than nothing for a 
last chance. 
My decision is, I'm going to do everything I can for the three 
months. 
But that decided, the big question arises: what the hell can I 
really do? I've already done the best I can with what I know. 
More of the same is not going to do any good. 
Unfortunately, I don't have a year to go back to school and 
re-study a lot of theory. I don't even have the time to read the 
magazines, papers, and reports piling up in my office. I don't 
have the time or the budget to screw around with consultants, 
making studies and all that crap. And anyway, even if I did have 
the time and money, I'm not sure  any of those would give me a 
much better insight than what I've got now. 
I have the feeling there are some  things I'm not taking into 
account. If I'm ever going to get us out of this hole, I can't take 
anything for granted; Tm going to have to watch closely and 
think carefully about what is basically going on ... take it one 
step at a time. 
I slowly realize that the only tools I have—limited as they 
may be—are my own eyes and ears, my own hands, my own 
voice, my own mind. That's about it. I am all I have. And the 
thought keeps coming to me: I don't know if that's enough. 
When I finally crawl into bed,  Julie is a lump under the 
sheets. She is exactly the way I left her twenty-one hours ago. 
She's sleeping. Lying beside her on the mattress, still unable to 
sleep, I stare at the dark ceiling. 
That's when I decide to tr y to find Jonah again.  
Captured by Plamen T.
60
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement8 
Two steps after rolling out of bed in the morning, I don't like 
moving at all. But in the midst of a morning shower, memory of 
my predicament returns. When yo u've only got three months to 
work with, you don't have much time to waste feeling tired. I 
rush past Julie—who doesn't have much to say to me—and the 
kids, who already seem to sense that something is wrong, and 
head for the plant. 
The whole way there I'm thinking about how to get in touch 
with Jonah. That's the problem. Be fore I can ask for his help, I've 
got to find him. 
The first thing I do when I get to the office is have Fran 
barricade the door against the hordes massing outside for frontal 
attack. Just as I reach my desk, Fran buzzes me; Bill Peach is on 
the line. 
"Great," I mutter. 
I pick up the phone. 
"Yes, Bill." 
"Don't you ever walk out of one of my meetings again," rum- 
bles Peach. "Do you understand me?" 
"Yes, Bill." 
"Now, because of your untimely absence yesterday, we've got 
some things to go over," he says. 
A few minutes later, I've pulled Lou into the office to help 
me with the answers. Then Peac h has dragged in Ethan Frost and 
we're having a four-way conversation. 
And that's the last chance I have  to think about Jonah for the 
rest of the day. After I'm done with Peach, half a dozen people 
come into my office for a meeting that has been postponed since 
last week. 
The next thing I know, I look out the window and it's dark 
outside. The sun has set and I'm still in the middle of my sixth 
meeting of the day. After everyone  has gone, I take care of some 
paperwork. It's past seven when I hop in the car to go home. 
While waiting in traffic for a long  light to turn green, I finally 
have the opportunity to remember how the day began. That's 
when I get back to thinking about Jonah. Two blocks later, I 
remember my old address book.  
Captured by Plamen T.
61
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementI pull over at a gas station and use the pay phone to call 
Julie. 
"Hello," she answers. 
" H i ,  i t ' s  m e , "  I  s a y .  " L i s t e n ,  I ' v e  g o t  t o  g o  o v e r  t o  m y  
mother's for something. I'm not sure how long I'll be, so why 
don't you go ahead and eat without me." 
"The next time you want dinner—" 
"Look, don't give me any grief, Julie; this is important." 
There is a second of silence before I hear the click. 
It's always a little strange going back to the old neighbor- 
hood, because everywhere I look is some kind of memory waiting 
just out of sight in my mind's eye. I pass the corner where I had 
the fight with Bruno Krebsky. I drive down the street where we 
played ball summer after summer. I see the alley where I made 
out for the first time with Angelin a. I go past the utility pole upon 
which I grazed the fender of my old man's Chevy (and subse- 
quently had to work two months in the store for free to pay for 
the repair). All that stuff. The closer I get to the house, the more 
memories come crowding in, and th e more I get this feeling that's 
kind of warm and uncomfortably tense. 
Julie hates to come here. When  we first moved to town, we 
used to come down every Sunday  to see my mother and Danny 
and his wife, Nicole. But there got to be too many fights about it, 
so we don't make the trip much anymore. 
I park the Mazda by the curb in front of the steps to my 
mother's house. It's a narrow, br ick row house, about the same as 
any other on the street. Down at the corner is my old man's store, 
the one my brother owns today. The lights are off down there; 
Danny closes at six. Getting out of my car, I feel conspicuous in 
my suit and tie. 
My mother opens the door. 
"Oh my god," she says. She clutches her hands over her 
heart. "Who's dead?" 
"Nobody died, Mom," I say. 
"It's Julie, isn't it," she says. "Did she leave you?" 
"Not yet," I say. 
"Oh," she says. "Well, let me see ... it isn't Mothers' 
Day . . ." 
"Mom, I'm just here to look for something."  
Captured by Plamen T.
62
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Look for something? Look for what?" she asks, turning to 
let me in. "Come in, come in. You're letting all the cold inside. 
Boy, you gave me a scare. Here  you are in town and you never 
come to see me anymore. What's  the matter? You too important 
now for your old mother?" 
"No, of course not, Mom. I've be en very busy at the plant," I 
say. ^ 
"Busy, busy," she says leading the way to the kitchen. "You 
hungry?" 
"No, listen, I don't want to put you to any trouble," I say. 
She says, "Oh, it's no trouble. I got some ziti I can heat up. 
You want a salad too?" 
"No, listen, a cup of coffee will be  fine. I just need to find my 
old address book," I tell her. "It's the one I had when I was in 
college. Do you know where it might be?" 
We step into the kitchen. 
"Your old address book . . ." she muses as she pours a cup 
of coffee from the percolator. "How about some cake? Danny 
brought some day-old over last night from the store." 
"No thanks, Mom. I'm fine," I sa y. "It's probably in with all 
my old notebooks and stuff from school." 
She hands me the cup of coffee. "Notebooks . . ." 
"Yeah, you know where they might be?" 
Her eyes blink. She's thinking. 
"Well . . . no. But I put all that stuff up in the attic," she 
says. 
"Okay, I'll go look there," I say. 
Coffee in hand, I head for the stairs leading to the second 
floor and up into the attic. 
"Or it might all be in the basement," she says. 
Three hours later—after dusting through the drawings I 
made in the first grade, my model airplanes, an assortment of 
musical instruments my brother once attempted to play in his 
quest to become a rock star, my  yearbooks, four steamer trunks 
filled with receipts from my fatber's business, old love letters, old 
snapshots, old newspapers, old you-name-it—the address book is 
still at large. We give up on the attic. My mother prevails upon 
me to have some ziti. Then we try the basement. 
"Oh, look!" says my mother. 
"Did you find it?" I ask.  
Captured by Plamen T.
63
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"No, but here's a picture of yo ur Uncle Paul before he was 
arrested for embezzlement. Did I ever tell you that story?" 
After another hour, we've gone through everything, and I've 
had a refresher course in all there is to know about Uncle Paul. 
Where the hell could it be? 
"Well, I don't know," says my mother. "Unless it could be in 
your old room." 
We go upstairs to the room I used to share with Danny. Over 
in the corner is the old desk where I used to study when I was a 
kid. I open the top drawer. An d, of course, there it is. 
"Mom, I need to use your phone." 
My mother's phone is located on the landing of the stairs 
between the floors of the house. It's the same phone that was 
installed in 1936 after my father began to make enough money 
from the store to afford one. I sit down on the steps, a pad of 
paper on my lap, briefcase at my  feet. I pick up the receiver, 
which is heavy enough to bludge on a burglar into submission. I 
dial the number, the first of many. 
It's one o'clock by now. But I'm calling Israel, which happens 
to be on the other side of the world from us. And vice versa. 
Which roughly means their days are our nights, our nights are 
their mornings, and consequently, one in the morning is not such 
a bad time to call. 
Before long, I've reached a friend I made at the university, 
someone who knows what's become of Jonah. He finds me an- 
other number to call. By two o'clock, I've got the tablet of paper 
on my lap covered with numbers I've scribbled down, and I'm 
talking to some people who work with Jonah. I convince one of 
them to give me the number wh ere I can reach him. By three 
o'clock, I've found him. He's in London. After several transfers 
here and there across some office of  some company, I'm told that 
he will call me when he gets in. I don't really believe that, but I 
doze by the phone. And forty-five minutes later, it rings. 
"Alex?" 
It's his voice. 
"Yes, Jonah," I say. 
"I got a message you had called." 
"Right," I say. "You remember our meeting in O'Hare." 
"Yes, of course I remember it,"  he says. "And I presume you 
have something to tell me now."  
Captured by Plamen T.
64
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementI freeze for a moment. Then I realize he's referring to his 
question, what is the goal? 
"Right," I say. 
"Well?" 
I hesitate. My answer seems so ludicrously simple I am sud- 
denly afraid that it must be wrong , that he will laugh at me. But I 
blurt it out. 
"The goal of a manufacturing organization is to make 
money," I say to him. "And everyt hing else we do is a means to 
achieve the goal." 
But Jonah doesn't laugh at me. 
"Very good, Alex. Very good," he says quietly. 
"Thanks," I tell him. "But, see,  the reason I called was to ask 
you a question that's kind of related to the discussion we had at 
O'Hare." 
"What's the problem?" he asks. 
"Well, in order to know if my plant is helping the company 
make money, I have to have some  kind of measurements," I say. 
"Right?" 
"That's correct," he says. 
"And I know that up in the ex ecutive suite at company head- 
quarters, they've got measurements  like net profit and return on 
investment and cash flow, which they apply to the overall organi- 
zation to check on progress toward the goal." 
"Yes, go on," says Jonah. 
"But where I am, down at the plant level, those measure- 
ments don't mean very much. And the measurements I use inside 
the plant . . . well, I'm not abso lutely sure, but I don't think 
they're really telling the whole story," I say. 
"Yes, I know exactly what you mean," says Jonah. 
"So how can I know whether what's happening in my plant is 
truly productive or non-productive?" I ask. 
For a second, it gets quiet on the other end of the line. Then 
I hear him say to somebody with him, "Tell him I'll be in as soon 
as I'm through with this call." 
Then he speaks to me. 
"Alex, you have hit upon something very important," he 
says. "I only have time to talk to you for a few minutes, but 
perhaps I can suggest a few things which might help you. You 
see, there is more than one way to express the goal. Do you 
understand? The goal stays the same, but we can state it in differ- 
Captured by Plamen T.
65
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementent ways, ways which mean the sa me thing as those two words, 
'making money.' ' 
"Okay," I answer, "so I can say the goal is to increase net 
profit, while simultaneously increasing both ROI and cash flow, 
and that's the equivalent of sayi ng the goal is to make money." 
"Exactly," he says. "One expre ssion is the equivalent of the 
other. But as you have discovered, those conventional measure- 
ments you use to express the goal  do not lend themselves very 
well to the daily operations of th e manufacturing organization. In 
fact, that's why I developed a different set of measurements." 
"What kind of measurements are those?" I ask. 
"They're measurements which express the goal of making 
money perfectly well, but which also permit you to develop oper- 
ational rules for running your plant," he says. "There are three 
of them. Their names are throughput, inventory and operational 
expense." 
"Those all sound familiar," I say. 
"Yes, but their definitions are not," says Jonah. "In fact, you 
will probably want to write them down," 
Pen in hand, I flip ahead to a clean sheet of paper on my 
tablet and tell him to go ahead. 
"Throughput," he says, "is the rate at which the system gen- 
erates money through sales." 
I write it down word for word. 
Then I ask, "But what about production? Wouldn't it be 
more correct to say—" 
"No," he says. "Through sales—not production. If you pro- 
duce something, but don't sell it, it's not throughput. Got it?" 
"Right. I thought maybe becaus e I'm plant manager I could 
substitute—" 
Jonah cuts me off. 
"Alex, let me tell you something," he says. "These defini- 
tions, even though they may sound simple, are worded very pre- 
cisely. And they should be; a measurement not clearly defined is 
worse than useless. So I suggest you consider them carefully as a 
group. And remember that if yo u want to change one of them, 
you will have to change at leas t one of the others as well." 
"Okay," I say warily. 
"The next measurement is inventory," he says. "Inventory is 
all the money that the system has invested in purchasing things 
which it intends to sell."  
Captured by Plamen T.
66
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementI write it down, but I'm wonderin g about it, because it's very 
different from the traditional definition of inventory. 
"And the last measurement?" I ask. 
"Operational expense," he says. "Operational expense is all 
the money the system spends in order to turn inventory into 
throughput." 
"Okay," I say as I write. "But what about the labor invested 
in inventory? You make it sound as though labor is operational 
expense?" 
"Judge it according to the definitions," he says. 
"But the value added to the product by direct labor has to be 
a part of inventory, doesn't it?" 
"It might be, but it doesn' t have to be," he says. 
"Why do you say that?" 
"Very simply, I decided to define  it this way because I believe 
it's better not to take the value added into account," he says. "It 
eliminates the confusion over whether a dollar spent is an invest- 
ment or an expense. That's why I defined inventory and opera- 
tional expense the way I just gave you." 
"Oh," I say. "Okay. But how do I relate these measurements 
to my plant?" 
"Everything you manage in your plant is covered by those 
measurements," he says. 
"Everything?" I say. I don't quite believe him. "But going 
back to our original conversati on, how do I use these measure- 
ments to evaluate productivity?" 
"Well, obviously you have to express the goal in terms of the 
measurements," he says, adding, "Hold on a second, Alex." Then 
I hear him tell someone, "I'll be there in a minute." 
"So how do I express the goal?"  I ask, anxious to keep the 
conversation going. 
"Alex, I really have to run. And I know you are smart 
enough to figure it out on your own; all you have to do is think 
about it," he says. "Just remember we are always talking about 
the organization as a whole—not  about the manufacturing de- 
partment, or about one plant, or about one department within 
the plant. We are not concer ned with local optimums." 
"Local optimums?" I repeat. 
Jonah sighs. "I'll have to explain it to you some other time." 
"But, Jonah, this isn't enough,"  I say. "Even if I can define 
Captured by Plamen T.
67
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementthe goal with these measurements , how do I go about deriving 
operational rules for running my plant?" 
"Give me a phone number where you can be reached," he 
says. 
I give him my office number. 
"Okay, Alex, I really do have to go now," he says. 
"Right," I say. "Thanks for—" 
I hear the click from far away. 
"—talking to me." 
I sit there on the steps for some  time staring at the three 
definitions. At some point, I close my eyes. When I open them 
again, I see beams of sunlight be low me on the living room rug. I 
h a u l  m y s e l f  u p s t a i r s  t o  m y  o l d room and the bed I had when I 
was a kid. I sleep the rest of th e morning with my torso and limbs 
painstakingly arranged around the lumps in the mattress. 
Five hours later, I wake up feeling like a waffle.  
Captured by Plamen T.
68
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement9 
It's eleven o'clock when I wake up. Startled by what time it is, 
I fall onto my feet and head for the phone to call Fran, so she can 
let everyone know I haven't gone AWOL. 
"Mr. Rogo's office," Fran answers. 
"Hi, it's me," I say. 
"Well, hello stranger," she says. "We were just about ready to 
start checking the hospitals for yo u. Think you'll make it in to- 
day?" 
"Uh, yeah, I just had something unexpected come up with 
my mother, kind of an emergency," I say. 
"Oh, well, I hope everything's all right." 
"Yeah, it's, ah, taken care of now. More or less. Anything 
going on that I should know about?" 
"Well . . . let's see," she says, checking (I suppose) my mes- 
sage slips. "Two of the testing machines in G-aisle are down, and 
Bob Donovan wants to know if we can ship without testing." 
"Tell him absolutely not," I say. 
"Okay," says Fran. "And somebo dy from marketing is calling 
about a late shipment." 
My eyes roll over. 
"And there was a fist fight last  night on second shift . . . 
Lou still needs to talk to you about some numbers for Bill Peach 
... a reporter called this morn ing asking when the plant was 
going to close; I told him he'd have to talk to you . . . and a 
woman from corporate communica tions called about shooting a 
video tape here about productivity and robots with Mr. Granby," 
says Fran. 
"With G ranby ?" 
"That's what she said," says Fran. 
"What's the name and number?" 
She reads it to me. 
"Okay, thanks. See yo u later," I tell Fran. 
I call the woman at corporate right away. I can hardly believe 
the chairman of the board is going to come to the plant. There 
Captured by Plamen T.
69
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementmust be some mistake. I mean, by the time Granby's limo pulls 
up to the gate, the whol e plant might be closed. 
But the woman confirms it; they want to shoot Granby here 
sometime in the middle of next month. 
"We need a robot as a suitable background for Mr. Granby's 
remarks," says the woman. 
"So why did you pick Bearington?" I ask her. 
"The director saw a slide of one of yours and he likes the 
color. He thinks Mr. Granby will look good standing in front of 
it," she says. 
"Oh, I see," I tell her. "Have you talked to Bill Peach about 
this?" 
"No, I didn't think there was any need for that," she says. 
"Why? Is there a problem?" 
"You might want to run this pas t Bill in case he has any other 
s u g g e s t i o n s , "  I  t e l l  h e r .  " B u t  i t ' s  u p  t o  y o u .  J u s t  l e t  m e  k n o w  
when you have an exact date so  I can notify the union and have 
the area cleaned up." 
"Fine. I'll be in touch," she says. 
I hang up and sit there on the steps muttering, "So ... he 
likes the color." 
"What was that all about on the phone just now?" my mother 
asks. We're sitting together at the table. She's obliged me to have 
something to eat before I leave. 
I tell her about Granby coming. 
"Well that sounds like a feather in your cap, the head man— 
what's his name again?" asks my mother. 
"Granby." 
"Here he's coming all the way to your factory to see you," 
she says. "It must be an honor." 
"Yeah, it is in a way," I tell her.  "But actually he's just coming 
to have his picture taken with one of my robots." 
My mother's eyes blink. 
"Robots? Like from out-of-space?" she asks. 
"No, not from outer space. These are industrial robots. 
They're not like the ones on television." 
"Oh." Her eyes blink again. "Do they have faces?" 
"No, not yet. They mostly have arms . . . which do things 
like welding, stacking material s, spray painting, and so on. 
Captured by Plamen T.
70
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementThey're run by computer and you can program them to do dif- 
ferent jobs," I explain. 
Mom nods, still trying to picture what these robots are. 
"So why's this Granby guy want  to have his picture taken 
with a bunch of robots who don' t even have faces?" she asks. 
"I guess because they're the latest  thing, and he wants to tell 
everybody in the corporation that we ought to be using more of 
them so that—" 
I stop and glance away for a second, and see Jonah sitting 
there smoking his cigar. 
"So that what?" asks my mother. 
"Uh ... so that we can increase productivity," I mumble, 
waving my hand in the air. 
And Jonah says, have they really increased productivity at 
\ our plant? Sure they have, I say. We had—what?—a thirty-six 
percent improvement in one area. Jonah puffs his cigar. 
"Is something the matter?" my mother asks. 
"I just remembered something, that's all." 
"What? Something bad?" she asks. 
"No, an earlier conversation I had with the man I talked to 
last night," I say. 
My mother puts her hand on my shoulder. 
"Alex, what's wrong?" she's asking. "Come on, you can tell 
me. I know something's wrong. You show up out of the blue on 
my doorstep, you're calling people all over the place in the mid- 
dle of the night. What is it?" 
"See, Mom, the plant isn't doing so well . . . and, ah ... 
well, we're not making any money." 
My mother's brow darkens. 
"Your big plant not making any money?" she asks. "But 
you're telling me about this fancy guy Granby coming, and these 
robot things, whatever they are. And you're not making any 
money?" 
"That's what I said, Mom." 
"Don't these robot things work?" 
"Mom—" 
"If they don't work, maybe the store will take them back." 
"Mom, will you forget about the robots!" 
She shrugs. "I was just trying to help." 
I reach over and pat her hand. 
"Yes, I know you were," I say. "Thanks. Really, thanks for 
Captured by Plamen T.
71
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementeverything. Okay? I've got to get going now. I've really got a lot 
of work to do." 
I  s t a n d  u p  a n d  g o  t o  g e t  m y  b r i e f c a s e .  M y  m o t h e r  f o l l o w s .  
Did I get enough to eat? Would I like a snack to take with me for 
later in the day? Finally, she takes my sleeve and holds me in one 
place. 
"Listen to me, Al. Maybe you've got some problems. I know 
you do, but this running all over the place, staying up all night 
isn't good for you. You've got to  stop worrying. It's not going to 
help you. Look what worrying did to your father," she says. "It 
killed him." 
"But, Mom, he was run over by a bus." 
"So if he hadn't been so busy worrying he would have looked 
before he crossed the street." 
I sigh. "Yeah, well, Mom, you may have a point. But it's more 
complicated than you think." 
"I mean it! No worrying!" she says. "And this Granby fellow, 
if he's making trouble for you, you let me know. I'll call him and 
tell him what a worker you are. And who should know better than 
a mother? You leave him to me. I'll straighten him out." 
I smile. I put my arm ar ound her shoulders. 
"I bet you would, Mom." 
"You know I would." 
I tell Mom to call me as soon as  her phone bill arrives in the 
mail, and I'll come over and pay it. I give her a hug and a kiss 
good-bye, and I'm out of there. I walk out into the daylight and 
get into the Mazda. For a moment, I consider going straight to the 
office. But a glance at the wrinkles  in my suit and a rub of the 
stubble on my chin convinces me to go home and clean up first. 
Once I'm on my way, I keep hearing Jonah's voice saying to 
me: "So your company is making thirty-six percent more money 
from your plant just by installin g some robots? Incredible." And I 
remember that I was the one who was smiling. I was the one who 
thought he didn't understand the realities of manufacturing. Now 
I feel like an idiot. 
Yes, the goal is to make money. I know that now. And, yes, 
Jonah, you're right; productivity did not go up thirty-six percent 
just because we installed some ro bots. For that matter, did it go 
up at all? Are we making any more money because of the robots? 
And the truth is, I don't know. I find myself shaking my head. 
Captured by Plamen T.
72
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementBut I wonder how Jonah knew? He seemed to know right 
away that productivity hadn't increased. There were those ques- 
tions he asked. 
One of them, I remember as I'm driving, was whether we 
had been able to sell any more prod ucts as a result of having the 
robots. Another one was whether we had reduced the number of 
people on the payroll. Then he had wanted to know if inventories 
had gone down. Three basic questions. 
When I get home, Julie's car is gone. She's out some place, 
which is just as well. She's proba bly furious at me. And I simply 
do not have time to  explain right now. 
After I'm inside, I open my briefcase to make a note of those 
questions, and I see the list of measurements Jonah gave me last 
night. From the second I glance at  those definitions again, it's 
obvious. The questions match the measurements. 
That's how Jonah knew. He was using the measurements in 
the crude form of simple questions  to see if his hunch about the 
robots was correct: did we sell any more products (i.e., did our 
throughput go up?); did we lay off anybody (did our operational 
expense go down?); and the last, exactly what he said: did our 
inventories go down? 
With that observation, it doesn't take me long to see how to 
express the goal through Jonah' s measurements. I'm still a little 
puzzled by the way he worded the definitions. But aside from 
that, it's clear that every co mpany would want to have its 
throughput go up. Every company would also want the other 
two, inventory and operational expens e, to go down, if at all pos- 
sible. And certainly it's best if  they all occur simultaneously—just 
as with the trio that Lou and I found. 
So the way to express the goal is this? 
Increase throughput while simultaneously reducing both in- 
ventory and operating expense. 
That means if the robots have made throughput go up and 
the other two go down, they've made money for the system. But 
what's really happened since they started working? 
I don't know what effect, if any, they've had on throughput. 
But off the top of my head, I know inventories have generally 
increased over the past six or seven months, although I can't say 
for sure if the robots are to blame. The robots have increased our 
depreciation, because they're ne w equipment, but they haven't 
directly taken away any jobs fr om the plant; we simply shifted 
Captured by Plamen T.
73
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementpeople around. Which means the robots had to increase opera- 
tional expense. 
Okay, but efficiencies have gone up because of the robots. So 
maybe that's been our salvation.  When efficiencies go up, the 
cost-per-part has to come down. 
But did the cost really come down? How could the cost-per- 
part go down if operational expense went up? 
By the time I make it to the plan t, it's one o'clock, and I still 
haven't thought of a satisfactory answer. I'm still thinking about it 
as I walk through the office doors.  The first thing I do is stop by 
Lou's office. 
"Have you got a couple minutes?" I ask. 
"Are you kidding?" he says. "I've been looking for you all 
morning." 
He reaches for a pile of paper on the corner of his desk. I 
know it's got to be the report he  has to send up to division. 
"No, I don't want to talk abou t that right now," I tell him. 
"I've got something more important on my mind." 
I watch his eyebrows go up. 
"More important than this report for Peach?" 
"Infinitely more important than that," I tell him. 
Lou shakes his head as he leans back in his swivel chair and 
gestures for me to have a seat. 
"What can I do for you?" 
"After those robots out on the floor came on line, and we got 
most of the bugs out and all that," I say, "what happened to our 
sales?" 
Lou's eyebrows come back down again; he's leaning forward 
and squinting at me over his bifocals. 
"What kind of question is that?" he asks. 
"A smart one, I hope," I say. "I need to know if the robots 
had any impact on our sales. An d specifically if there was any 
increase after they came on line." 
"Increase? Just about all of our sales have been level or in a 
downhill slide since last year." 
I'm a little irritated. 
"Well, would you mind just checking?" I ask. 
He holds up his hands in surrender. 
"Not at all. Got all the time in the world." 
Lou turns to his computer, and after looking through some 
Captured by Plamen T.
74
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementfiles, starts printing out handfuls of reports, charts, and graphs. 
We both start leafing through. But we find that in every case 
where a robot came on line, there was no increase in sales for any 
product for which they made parts, not even the slightest blip in 
the curve. For the heck of it, we also check the shipments made 
from the plant, but there was no incr ease there either. In fact, the 
only increase is in overdue shipments—they've grown rapidly 
over the last nine months. 
Lou looks up at me from the graphs. 
"Al, I don't know what you're trying to prove," he says. "But 
if you want to broadcast some success story on how the robots are 
going to save the plant with increased sales, the evidence just 
doesn't exist. The data practically say the opposite." 
"That's exactly what I was afraid of," I say. 
"What do you mean?" 
"I'll explain it in a minute. Let's look at inventories," I tell 
him. "I want to find out what happened to our work-in-process 
on parts produced by the robots." 
Lou gives up. 
"I can't help you there," he says. "I don't have anything on 
inventories by part number." 
"Okay, let's get Stacey in on this." 
Stacey Potazenik manages inventory control for the plant. 
Lou makes a call and pulls her out of another meeting. 
Stacey is a woman in her early 40 's. She's tall, thin, and brisk 
in her manner. Her hair is black with strands of gray and she 
wears big, round glasses. She is always dressed in jackets and 
skirts; never have I seen her in a blouse with any kind of lace, 
ribbon or frill. I know almost not hing about her personal life. She 
wears a ring, but she's never me ntioned a husband. She rarely 
mentions anything about her life ou tside the plant. I do know she 
works hard. 
When she comes in to see us, I ask her about work-in-process 
on those parts passing through the robot areas. 
"Do you want exact numbers?" she asks. 
"No, we just need to kn ow the trends," I say. 
"Well, I can tell you without looking that inventories went up 
on those parts," Stacey says. 
"Recently?" 
"No, it's been happening since late last summer, around the 
Captured by Plamen T.
75
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementend of the third quarter," she says . "And you can't blame me for 
it—even though everyone always does—because I fought it every 
step of the way." 
"What do you mean?" 
"You remember, don't you? Or maybe you weren't here 
then. But when the reports came in , we found the robots in weld- 
ing were only running at somethin g like thirty percent efficiency. 
And the other robots weren't much better. Nobody would stand 
for that." 
I look over at Lou. 
"We had to do something," he says. "Frost would have had 
my head if I hadn't spoken up. Those things were brand new and 
very expensive. They'd never pay for themselves in the projected 
time if we kept them  at thirty percent." 
"Okay, hold on a minute," I tell him. I turn back to Stacey. 
"What did you do then?" 
She says, "What could I do? I had to release more materials to 
the floor in all the areas feedin g the robots. Giving the robots 
more to produce increased their efficiencies. But ever since then, 
we've been ending each month wi th a surplus of those parts." 
"But the important thing was th at efficiencies did go up," 
says Lou, trying to add a bright note. "Nobody can find fault with 
us on that." 
"I'm not sure of that at all any  more," I say. "Stacey, why are 
we getting that surplus? How come we aren't consuming those 
parts?" 
"Well, in a lot of cases, we don't have any orders to fill at 
present which would call for those parts," she says. "And in the 
cases where we do have orders, we just can't seem to get enough 
of the other parts we need." 
"How come?" 
"You'd have to ask Bob Dono van about that," Stacey says. 
"Lou, let's have Bob paged," I say. 
Bob comes into the office with a smear of grease on his white 
shirt over the bulge of his beer gut, and he's talking nonstop 
about what's going on with the br eakdown of the automatic test- 
ing machines. 
"Bob," I tell him, "forget about that for now." 
"Something else wr ong?" he asks.  
Captured by Plamen T.
76
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Yes, there is. We've just been talking about our local celebri- 
ties, the robots," I say. 
Bob glances from side to side , wondering, I suppose, what 
we've been saying. 
"What are you worried about them for?" he asks. "The ro- 
bots work pretty good now." 
"We're not so sure about that," I say. "Stacey tells me we've 
got an excess of parts built by the robots. But in some instances 
we can't get enough of certain other parts to assemble and ship 
our orders." 
Bob says, "It isn't that we can't get enough parts—it's more 
that we can't seem to get them when we need them. That's true 
even with a lot of the robot parts. We'll have a pile of something 
like, say, a CD-50 sit around for months waiting for control boxes. 
Then we'll get the control boxes, but we won't have something 
else. Finally we get the something else, and we build the order 
and ship it. Next thing you know, you're looking around for a 
CD-50 and you can't find any. We'll have tons of CD-45's and 
80's, but no 50's. So we wait. And by the time we get the 50's 
again, all the control boxes are gone." 
"And so on, and so on, an d so on," says Stacey. 
"But, Stacey, you said the robots were producing a lot of 
parts for which we don't have product orders," I say. "That 
means we're producing parts we don't need." 
"Everybody tells me we'll use them eventually," she says. 
Then she adds, "Look, it's the same game everybody plays. 
Whenever efficiencies take a dr op, everybody draws against the 
future forecast to keep busy. We build inventory. If the forecast 
doesn't hold up, there's hell to pa y. Well, that's what's happening 
now. We've been building inventory for the better part of a year, 
and the market hasn't helped us one damn bit." 
"I know, Stacey, I know," I tell her. "And I'm not blaming 
you or anybody. I'm just tr ying to figure this out." 
Restless, I get up and pace. 
I say, "So the bottom line is this: to give the robots more to 
do, we released more materials." 
"Which, in turn, increased inventories," says Stacey. 
"Which has increased our costs," I add. 
"But the cost of those parts went down," says Lou. 
"Did it?" I ask. "What about the added carrying cost of in- 
Captured by Plamen T.
77
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementventory? That's operational expense. And if that went up, how 
could the cost of parts go down?" 
"Look, it depends on volume," says Lou. 
"Exactly," I say. "Sales volume . . . that's what matters. And 
when we've got parts that can't be assembled into a product and 
sold because we don't have the ot her components, or because we 
don't have the orders, then we're increasing our costs." 
"Al," says Bob, "are you trying  to tell us we got screwed by 
the robots?" 
I sit down again. 
"We haven't been managing according to the goal," I mut- 
ter. 
Lou squints. "The goal? You mean our objectives for the 
month?" 
I look around at them. 
"I think I need to explain a few things."  
Captured by Plamen T.
78
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement10 
An hour and a half later, I've gone over it all with them. 
We're in the conference room, which I've commandeered be- 
cause it has a whiteboard. On that  whiteboard, I've drawn a dia- 
gram of the goal. Just now I've written out the definitions of the 
three measurements. 
All of them are quiet. Fina lly, Lou speaks up and says, 
"Where the heck did you get these definitions anyway?" 
"My old physics teacher gave them to me." 
"Who?" asks Bob. 
"Your old physics teacher?" asks Lou. 
"Yeah," I say defensively. "What about it?" 
"So what's his name?" asks Bob. 
"Or what's 'her' name," says Stacey. 
"His name is Jonah. He's from Israel." 
Bob says, "Well, what I want to know is, how come in 
throughput he says 'sales'? We'r e manufacturing. We've got noth- 
ing to do with sales; that's marketing." 
I shrug. After all, I asked the same question over the phone. 
Jonah said the definitions were precise, but I don't know how to 
answer Bob. I turn toward the window. Then I see what I should 
have remembered. 
"Come here," I say to Bob. 
He lumbers over. I put a hand on  his shoulder and point out 
the window. "What are those?" I ask him. 
"Warehouses," he says. 
"For what?" 
"Finished goods." 
"Would the company stay in business if all it did was manu- 
facture products to fill those warehouses?" 
"Okay, okay," Bob says sheepishly, seeing the meaning now. 
"So we got to sell the stuff to make money." 
Lou is still staring at the board. 
"Interesting, isn't it, that each  one of those definitions con- 
tains the word money," he says. "Throughput is the money coming 
in. Inventory is the money current ly inside the system. And oper- 
ational expense is the money we have to pay out to make 
Captured by Plamen T.
79
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementthroughput happen. One measurement for the incoming money, 
one for the money still stuck insi de, and one for the money going 
out." 
"Well, if you think about all the investment represented by 
what we've got sitting out there on the floor, you know for sure 
that inventory is money," says Stacey. "But what bothers me is 
that I don't see how he's treati ng value added to materials by 
direct labor." 
"I wondered the same thing, and I can only tell you what he 
told me," I say. 
"Which is?" 
"He said he thinks that it's just better if value added isn't 
taken into account. He said that it gets rid of the 'confusion' 
about what's an investment and what's an expense, I say. 
Stacey and the rest of us think about this for a minute. The 
room gets quiet again. 
Then Stacey says, "Maybe Jonah feels direct labor shouldn't 
be a part of inventory because th e time of the employees isn't 
what we're really selling. We 'buy' time from our employees, in a 
sense, but we don't sell that time to a customer—unless we're 
talking about service." 
"Hey, hold it," says Bob. "Now look here: if we're selling the 
product, aren't we also selling the time invested in that product?" 
"Okay, but what about idle time?" I ask. 
Lou butts in to settle it, saying, "All this is, if I understand it 
correctly, is a different way of doing the accounting. All employee 
time—whether it's direct or indirect, idle time or operating time, 
or whatever—is operational expense, according to Jonah. You're still 
accounting for it. It's just that his way is simpler, and you don't 
have to play as many games." 
Bob puffs out his chest. "Games? We, in operations, are hon- 
est, hard-working folk who do not have time for games." 
"Yeah, you're too busy turning idle time into process time 
with the stroke of a pen," says Lou. 
"Or turning process time into more piles of inventory," says 
Stacey. 
They go on bantering about this for a minute. Meanwhile, 
I'm thinking there might be something more to this besides sim- 
plification. Jonah mentioned confusion between investment and 
expense; are we confused enough  now to be doing something we 
shouldn't? Then I hear Stacey talking.  
Captured by Plamen T.
80
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"But how do we know the value of our finished goods?" she 
asks. 
"First of all, the market determines the value of the prod- 
uct," says Lou. "And in order for the corporation to make money, 
the value of the product—and th e price we're charging—has to 
be greater than the combination of  the investment in inventory 
and the total operational expens e per unit of what we sell." 
I see by the look on Bob's face that he's very skeptical. I ask 
him what's bothering him. 
"Hey, man, this is crazy," Bob grumbles. 
"Why?" asks Lou. 
"It won't work!" says Bob. "How can you account for every- 
thing in the whole damn system with three lousy measurements?" 
"Well," says Lou as he ponders the board. "Name something 
that won't fit in one of those three." 
"Tooling, machines . . ." Bob counts them on with his fin- 
gers. "This building, the whole plant!" 
"Those are in there," says Lou. 
"Where?" asks Bob. 
Lou turns to him. "Look, those things are part one and part 
the other. If you've got a machine, the depreciation on that ma- 
chine is operational expense. Whatever portion of the investment 
still remains in the machine, whic h could be sold, is inventory." 
"Inventory? I thought inventory was products, and parts 
and so on," says Bob. "You know, the stuff we're going to sell." 
Lou smiles. "Bob, the whole plant is an investment which can 
be sold—for the right price and under the right circumstances." 
And maybe sooner than we'd like, I think. 
Stacey says, "So investment is the same thing as inventory." 
"What about lubricating oil for the machines?" asks Bob. 
"It's operational expense," I tell him. "We're not going to 
sell that oil to a customer." 
"How about scrap?" he asks. 
"That's operational expense, too." 
"Yeah? What about what we sell to the scrap dealer?" 
"Okay, then it's the same as a machine," says Lou. "Any 
money we've lost is operational expense; any investment that we 
can sell is inventory." 
"The carrying costs have to be operational expense, don't 
they?" asks Stacey. 
Lou and I both nod.  
Captured by Plamen T.
81
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementThen I think about the "soft" things in business, things like 
knowledge—knowledge from consultants, knowledge gained 
from our own research and development. I throw it out to them 
to see how they think those th ings should be classified. 
Money for knowledge has us stumped for a while. Then we 
decide it depends, quite simply, upon what the knowledge is used 
for. If it's knowledge, say, which gives us a new manufacturing 
process, something that helps turn inventory into throughput, 
then the knowledge is operational expense. If we intend to sell 
the knowledge, as in the case of a patent or a technology license, 
then it's inventory. But if the knowledge pertains to a product 
which UniCo itself will build, it's like a machine—an investment 
to make money which will depreciate in value as time goes on. 
And, again, the investment that can be sold is inventory; the de- 
preciation is operational expense. 
"I got one for you," says Bob. "Here's one that doesn't fit: 
Granby's chauffeur." 
"What?" 
"You know, the old boy in the bl ack suit who drives J. Bart 
Granby's limo for him," says Bob. 
"He's operational expense," says Lou. 
"Like hell he is! You tell me how Granby's chauffeur turns 
inventory into throughput," says Bob, and looks around as if he's 
really got us on this one. "I bet his chauffeur doesn't even know 
that inventory and throughput exist." 
"Unfortunately, neither do some of our secretaries," says 
Stacey. 
I say, "You don't have to have your hands on the product in 
order to turn inventory into thro ughput. Every day, Bob, you're 
out there helping to turn invent ory into throughput. But to the 
people on the floor, it probably looks like all you do is walk 
around and make life complicated for everyone." 
"Yeah, no appreciation from nobody," Bob pouts, "but you 
still haven't told me how the chauffeur fits in." 
"Well, maybe the chauffeur helps Granby have more time to 
think and deal with customers, etc., while he's commuting here 
and there," I suggest. 
"Bob, why don't you ask Mr. Granby next time you two have 
lunch," says Stacey. 
"That's not as funny as you think," I say. "I just heard this 
Captured by Plamen T.
82
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementmorning that Granby may be comi ng here to make a video tape 
on robots." 
"Granby's coming here?" asks Bob. 
"And if Granby's coming, you can bet Bill Peach and all the 
others will be tagging along," says Stacey. 
"Just what we need," grumbles Lou. 
Stacey turns to Bob. "You see now why Al's asking questions 
about the robots. We've got to  look good for Granby." 
"We do look good," says Lou. "The efficiencies there are 
quite acceptable; Granby will not  be embarrassed by appearing 
with the robots on tape." 
But I say, "Dammit, I don't ca re about Granby and his video- 
tape. In fact, I will lay odds that the tape will never be shot here 
anyway, but that's beside the point. The problem is that every- 
body—including me until now—has thought these robots have 
been a big productivity improvement. And we just learned that 
they're not productive in terms of the goal. The way we've been 
using them, they're actually co unter-productive." 
Everyone is silent. 
Finally, Stacey has the courage to say, "Okay, so somehow 
we've got to make the robots prod uctive in terms of the goal." 
"We've got to do more than that," I say. I turn to Bob and 
Stacey. "Listen, I've already told Lo u, and I guess this is as good a 
time as any to tell the both of you. I know you'll hear it eventually 
anyhow." 
"Hear what?" asks Bob. 
"We've been given an ultimatum by Peach—three months to 
turn the plant around or he clos es us down for good," I say. 
Both of them are stunned for a few moments. Then they're 
both firing questions at me. I take a few minutes and tell them 
A hat I know—avoiding the news about the division; I don't want 
to send them into panic. 
Finally, I say, "I know it doesn't seem like a lot of time. It 
isn't. But until they kick me out of here, I'm not giving up. What 
vou decide to do is your own bu siness, but if you want out, I 
suggest you leave now. Because for the next three months, I'm 
joing to need everything you can give me. If we can make this 
place show any progress, I'm goin g to go to Peach and do what- 
ever I have to to make him give us more time." 
"Do you really think we can do it?" asks Lou.  
Captured by Plamen T.
83
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"I honestly don't know," I say . "But at least now we can see 
some of what we're doing wrong," 
"So what can we do that 's different?" asks Bob. 
"Why don't we stop pushing materials through the robots 
and try to reduce inventories?" suggests Stacey. 
"Hey, I'm all for lower inventory," says Bob. "But if we don't 
produce, our efficiencies go do wn. Then we're right back where 
we started." 
"Peach isn't going to give us a second chance if all we give 
him is lower efficiencies," says Lou. "He wants higher efficiencies, 
not lower." 
I run my fingers through my hair. 
Then Stacey says, "Maybe you should try calling this guy, 
Jonah, again. He seems like he's got a good handle on what's 
what." 
"Yeah, at least we could find out what he has to say," says 
Lou. 
" W e l l ,  I  t a l k e d  t o  h i m  l a s t  n i g h t .  T h a t ' s  w h e n  h e  g a v e  m e  a l l  
this stuff," I say, waving to the definitions on the board. "He was 
supposed to call me . . ." 
I look at their faces. 
"Well, okay, I'll try him again," I say and reach for my brief- 
case to get the London number. 
I put through a call from the phone in the conference room 
with the three of them listening expectantly around the table. But 
he isn't there anymore. Instead I end up talking to some secre- 
tary. 
"Ah, yes, Mr. Rogo," she says. "Jonah tried to call you, but 
your secretary said you were in a meeting. He wanted to talk to 
you before he left London toda y, but I'm afraid you've missed 
him." 
"Where is he going to be next?" I ask. 
"He was flying to New York. Perhaps you can catch him at 
his hotel," she says. 
I take down the name of the hotel and thank her. Then I get 
the number in New York from di rectory assistance, and expect- 
ing only to be able to leave a messa ge for him, I try it. The switch- 
board puts me through. 
"Hello?" says a sleepy voice. 
"Jonah? This is Alex Rogo. Did I wake you?" 
"As a matter of fact, you did."  
Captured by Plamen T.
84
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Oh, I'm sorry—I'll try not to keep you long. But I really 
need to talk to you at greater le ngth about what we were discuss- 
ing last night," I tell him. 
"Last night?" he asks. "Yes, I suppose it was 'last night' your 
time." 
"Maybe we could make arrangem ents for you to come to my 
plant and meet with me and my staff," I suggest. 
"Well, the problem is I have commitments lined up for the 
next three weeks, and then I'm go ing back to Israel," he says. 
"But, you see, I can't wait that  long," I say. "I've got some 
major problems I have to solve and not a lot of time. I under- 
stand now what you meant about the robots and productivity. 
But my staff and I don't know what  the next step should be and 
... uh, well, maybe if I expl ained a few things to you—" 
"Alex, I would like to help you, but I also need to get some 
sleep. I'm exhausted," he says. "But  I have a suggestion: if your 
schedule permits, why don't I meet with you here tomorrow 
morning at seven for breakfast at my hotel." 
"Tomorrow?" 
"That's right," he says. "We'll have about an hour and we 
can talk. Otherwise . . ." 
I look around at the others, all of them watching me anx- 
iously. I tell Jonah to hold on for a second. 
"He wants me to come to Ne w York tomorrow," I tell them. 
"Can anybody think of a reason why I shouldn't go?" 
"Are you kidding?" says Stacey. 
"Go for it," says Bob. 
"What have you got to lose?" says Lou. 
I take my hand off the mouthpiece. "Okay, I'll be there," I 
say. 
"Excellent!" Jonah says with relief. "Until then, good night." 
When I get back to my office, Fran looks up with surprise 
from her work. 
"So there you are!" she says and reaches for the message 
slips. "This man called you twice from London. He wouldn't say 
whether it was important or not." 
I say, "I've got a job for you: find a way to get me to New 
York tonight."  
Captured by Plamen T.
85
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement11 
But Julie does not understand. 
"Thanks for the advance notice," she says. 
"If I'd known earlier, I'd have told you," I say. 
"Everything is unexpected with you lately," she says. 
"Don't I always tell you when I know I've got trips coming 
up?" 
She fidgets next to the bedroom  door. I'm packing an over- 
night bag which lies open on the bed. We're alone; Sharon is 
down the street at a friend's house, and Davey is at band practice. 
"When is this going to end?" she asks. 
I stop midway through taking some underwear from a 
drawer. I'm getting irritated by the questions because we just 
went over the whole thing five minutes ago. Why is it so hard for 
her to understand? 
"Julie, I don't know." I say. "I've got a lot of problems to 
solve." 
More fidgeting. She doesn't lik e it. It occurs to me that 
maybe she doesn't trust me or something. 
"Hey, I'll call you as soon as I get to New York," I tell her. 
"Okay?" 
She turns as if she might walk out of the room. 
"Fine. Call," she says, "but I might not be here." 
I stop again. 
"What do you mean by that?" 
"I might be out someplace," she says. 
"Oh," I say. "Well, I guess I'll have to take my chances." 
"I guess you will," she says, fu rious now, on her way out the 
door. 
I grab an extra shirt and slam the drawer shut. When I finish 
packing, I go looking for her. I find her in the living room. She 
stands by the window, biting the end of her thumb. I take her 
hand and kiss the thumb. Then I try to hug her. 
"Listen, I know I've been undependable lately," I say. "But 
this is important. It's for the plant—" 
She shakes her head, pulls away. I follow her into the 
kitchen. She stands with her back to me.  
Captured by Plamen T.
86
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Everything is for your job," she says. "It's all you think 
about. I can't even count on you for dinner. And the kids are 
asking me why you're like this—" 
There is a tear forming in the corner of her eye. I reach to 
wipe it away, but she br ushes my hand aside. 
"No!" she says. "Just go catch your plane to wherever it is 
you're going." 
"Julie-" 
She walks past me. 
"Julie, this is not fair!" I yell at her. 
She turns to me. 
"That's right," she says. "You are not being fair. To me or to 
your children." 
She goes upstairs without looking back. And I don't even 
have time to settle this; I'm already late for my flight, I pick up 
my bag in the hall, sling it over  my shoulder, and grab my brief- 
case on my way out the door. 
At 7:10 the next morning, I'm waiting in the hotel lobby for 
Jonah. He's a few minutes late, but that's not what's on my mind 
as I pace the carpeted floor. I'm thinking about Julie. I'm wor- 
ried about her . . . about us. After I checked into my room last 
night, I tried to call home. No an swer. Not even one of the kids 
picked up the phone. I walked ar ound the room for half an hour, 
kicked a few things, and tried calling again. Still no answer. From 
then until two in the morning, I dialed the number every fifteen 
minutes. Nobody home. At one point I tried the airlines to see if I 
could get on a plane back, but nothing was flying in that direction 
at that hour. I finally fell asleep. My wake-up call got me out of 
bed at six o'clock. I tried the numb er twice before I left my room 
this morning. The second time, I let it ring for five minutes. Still 
no answer. 
"Alex!" 
I turn. Jonah is walking towa rd me. He's wearing a white 
shirt—no tie, no jacket—and plain trousers. 
"Good morning," I say as we shake hands. I notice his eyes 
are puffy, like those of someone who hasn't had a lot of sleep; I 
think that mine probably look the same. 
"Sorry I'm late," he says. "I had dinner last night with some 
associates and we got into a disc ussion which went, I believe, until 
three o'clock in the morning. Let's get a table for breakfast." 
Captured by Plamen T.
87
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementI walk with him into the restaurant and the maitre d' leads us 
to a table with a white linen cloth. 
"How did you do with the measurements I defined for you 
over the telephone?" he asks after we've sat down. 
I switch my mind to business, and tell him how I expressed 
the goal with his measurements. Jonah seemed very pleased. 
"Excellent," he says. "You have done very well." 
"Well, thanks, but I'm afraid I need more than a goal and 
some measurements to save my plant." 
"To save your plant?" he asks. 
I say, "Well . . . yes, that's why I'm here. I mean, I didn't 
just call you to talk philosophy." 
He smiles. "No, I didn't think you tracked me down purely 
for the love of truth. Okay, Alex, tell me what's going on." 
"This is confidential," I say to him. Then I explain the situa- 
tion with the plant and the thr ee-month deadline before it gets 
closed. Jonah listens attentively. Wh en I've finished, he sits back. 
"What do you expect from me?" he asks. 
"I don't know if there is one, bu t I'd like you to help me find 
the answer that will let me keep  my plant alive and my people 
working," I say. 
Jonah looks away for a moment. 
"I'll tell you my problem," he says. "I have an unbelievable 
schedule. That's why we're meeting at this ungodly hour, inci- 
dentally. With the commitments I already have, there is no way I 
can spend the time to do all the things you probably would ex- 
pect from a consultant." 
I sigh, very disappointed. I say,  "Okay, if you're too busy—" 
"Wait, I'm  not finished," he says. "That doesn't mean you 
can't save your plant. I don't have time to solve your problems for 
you. But that wouldn't be the best thing for you anyway —" 
"What do you mean?" I interrupt. 
Jonah holds up his hands. "Let  me finish!" he says. "From 
what I've heard, I think you can solve your own problems. What 
I will do is give you some basic rules to apply. If you and your 
people follow them intelligently, I think you will save your plant. 
Fair enough?" 
"But, Jonah, we've only got three months," I say. 
He nods impatiently. "I know, I know," he says. "Three 
months is more than enough ti me to show improvement ... if 
Captured by Plamen T.
88
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementyou are diligent, that is. And if  you aren't, then nothing I say 
could save you anyway." 
"Oh, you can count on our d iligence, for sure," I say. 
"Shall we try it then?" he asks. 
"Frankly, I don't know what else to do," I say. Then I smile. 
"I guess I'd better ask what this is going to cost me. Do you have 
some kind of standard rate or something?" 
"No, I don't," he says. "But I' l l  m a k e  a  d e a l  w i t h  y o u .  J u s t  
pay me the value of what  you learn from me." 
"How will I know what that is?" 
"You should have a reasonable idea after we've finished. If 
your plant folds, then obviously the value of your learning won't 
have been much; you won't owe me anything. If, on the other 
hand, you learn enough from me to make billions, then you 
should pay me accordingly," he says. 
I laugh. What have I got to lose? 
"Okay, fair enough," I say finally. 
We shake hands across the table. 
A waiter interrupts to ask if we're ready to order. Neither of 
us have opened the menus, but it turns out we both want coffee. 
The waiter informs us there's a ten-dollar minimum for sitting in 
the dining room. So Jonah tells him to bring us both our own 
pots of coffee and a quart of milk . He gives us a dirty look and 
vanishes. 
"Now then," Jonah says. "Where shall we begin .  . ." 
"I thought maybe first we could focus on the robots," I tell 
him. 
Jonah shakes his head. 
"Alex, forget about your robots for now. They're like some 
new industrial toy everybody's discovered. You've got much more 
fundamental things to concer n yourself with," he says. 
"But you're not taking into account how important they are 
to us," I tell him. "They're some of our most expensive equip- 
ment. We absolutely have to keep them productive." 
"Productive with respect to what ?" he asks with an edge in 
his voice. 
"Okay, right ... we have to k eep them productive in terms 
of the goal," I say. "But I need high efficiencies to make those 
things pay for themselves, and I only  get the efficiencies if they're 
making parts." 
Jonah is shaking his head again.  
Captured by Plamen T.
89
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Alex, you told me in our first meeting that your plant has 
very good efficiencies overall. If your efficiencies are so good, 
then why is your plant in trouble?" 
He takes a cigar out of his shir t pocket and bites the end off 
of it. 
"Okay, look, I have to care about efficiencies if only for the 
reason that my management cares about them," I tell him. 
"What's more important to your  management, Alex: efficien- 
cies or money?" he asks. 
"Money, of course. But isn't high  efficiency essential to mak- 
ing money?" I ask him. 
"Most of the time, your struggle for high efficiencies is taking 
you in the opposite direction of your goal." 
"I don't understand," I say. "A nd even if I did, my manage- 
ment wouldn't." 
But Jonah lights his cigar and says between puffs, "Okay, 
let's see if I can help you unders tand with some basic questions 
and answers. First tell me this: when you see one of your workers 
standing idle with nothing to do , is that good or bad for the 
company?" 
"It's bad, of course," I say. 
"Always?" 
I feel this is a trick question. 
"Well, we have to do maintenance—" 
"No, no, no, I'm talking abou t a production employee who is 
idle because there is no product to be worked on." 
"Yes, that's always bad," I say. 
"Why?" 
I chuckle. "Isn't it obvious? Because it's a waste of money! 
What are we supposed to do, pay people to do nothing? We can't 
afford to have idle time. Our costs are too high to tolerate it. It's 
inefficiency, it's low productivity—no matter how you measure 
it." 
He leans forward as if he's going to whisper a big secret to 
me. 
"Let me tell you something," he  says. "A plant in which ev- 
eryone is working all the ti me is very inefficient." 
"Pardon me?" 
"You heard me." 
"But how can you prove that?" I ask.  
Captured by Plamen T.
90
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementHe says, "You've already proven it in your own plant. It's 
right in front of your eyes. But you don't see it." 
Now I shake my head. I say, "Jonah, I don't think we're 
communicating. You see, in my plant, I don't have extra people. 
The only way we can get products out the door is to keep every- 
one working constantly." 
"Tell me, Alex, do you have excess inventories in your 
plant?" he asks. 
"Yes, we do," I say. 
"Do you have a lot of excess inventories?" 
"Well . .  . yes." 
"Do you have a lot of a lot of excess inventories?" 
"Yeah, okay, we do have a lot of  a lot of excess, but what's the 
point?" 
"Do you realize that the only way you can create excess in- 
ventories is by having excess manpower?" he says. 
I think about it. After a minute, I have to conclude he's right; 
machines don't set up and run th emselves. People had to create 
the excess inventory. 
"What are you suggesting I do?" I ask. "Lay off more peo- 
ple? I'm practically down to a skeleton force now." 
"No, I'm not suggesting that you lay off more people. But I 
am suggesting that you question how you are managing the ca- 
pacity of your plant. And let me tell you, it is not according to the 
goal." 
Between us, the waiter sets down  two elegant silver pots with 
steam coming out of their spouts. He puts out a pitcher of cream 
and pours the coffee. While he does this, I find myself staring 
toward the window. After a few seconds, I feel Jonah reach over 
and touch my sleeve. 
"Here's what's happening," he says. "Out there in the world 
at large, you've got a market dema nd for so much of whatever it 
is you're producing. And inside  your company, you've got so 
many resources, each of which has so much capacity, to fill that 
demand. Now, before I go on, do  you know what I mean by a 
'balanced plant'?" 
"You mean balancing a production line?" I ask. 
He says, "A balanced plant is essentially what every manufac- 
turing manager in the whole western world has struggled to 
achieve. It's a plant where the capacity of each and every resource 
Captured by Plamen T.
91
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementis balanced exactly with demand from the market. Do you know 
why managers try to do this?" 
I tell him, "Well, because if we  don't have enough capacity, 
we're cheating ourselves out of potential throughput. And if we 
have more than enough capacit y, we're wasting money. We're 
missing an opportunity to reduce operational expense." 
"Yes, that's exactly what everybody thinks," says Jonah. "And 
the tendency for most managers is to trim capacity wherever they 
can, so no resource is idle, and everybody has something to work 
on." 
"Yeah, sure, I know what you're talking about," I say. "We 
do that at our plant. In fact, it's  done at every plant I've ever 
seen." 
"Do you run a balanced plant?" he asks. 
"Well, it's as balanced as we can make it. Of course, we've got 
some machines sitting idle, but generally that's just outdated 
equipment. As for people, we've trimmed our capacity as much as 
we can," I explain. "But nobody ever runs a perfectly balanced 
plant." 
"Funny, I don't know of any balanced plants either," he says. 
"Why do you think it is that nobody after all this time and effort 
has ever succeeded in runni ng a balanced plant?" 
"I can give you a lot of reas ons. The number one reason is 
that conditions are always changing on us," I say. 
"No, actually that isn't the number one reason," he says. 
"Sure it is! Look at the things I have to contend with—my 
vendors, for example. We'll be in the middle of a hot order and 
discover that the vendor sent us a bad batch of parts. Or look at 
all the variables in my work force—absenteeism, people who 
don't care about quality, employee turnover, you name it. And 
then there's the market itself. Th e market is always changing. So 
it's no wonder we get too much capacity in one area and not 
enough in another." 
"Alex, the real reason you cannot  balance your plant is much 
more basic than all of those factors you mentioned. All of those 
are relatively minor." 
"Minor?" 
"The real reason is that the closer you come to a balanced 
plant, the closer you are to bankruptcy." 
"Come on!" I say. "You've got to be kidding me." 
"Look at this obsession with tr imming capacity in terms of 
Captured by Plamen T.
92
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementthe goal," he says. "When you lay off people, do you increase 
sales?" 
"No, of course not," I say. 
"Do you reduce your inventory?" he asks. 
"No, not by cutting people," I say. "What we do by laying off 
workers is cut our expenses." 
"Yes, exactly," Jonah says. "You improve only one measure- 
ment, operational expense." 
"Isn't that enough?" 
"Alex, the goal is not to reduce operational expense by itself. 
The goal is not to improve one measurement in isolation. The 
goal is to reduce operational ex pense and reduce inventory while 
simultaneously increasing throughput," says Jonah. 
"Fine. I agree with that," I say. "But if we reduce expenses, 
and inventory and throughput stay the same, aren't we better 
off?" 
"Yes, if you do not increase inventory and/or reduce 
throughput," he says. 
"Okay, right. But balancing ca pacity doesn't affect either 
one," I say. 
"Oh? It doesn't? How do you know that?" 
"We just said—" 
"I didn't say anything of th e sort. I asked you. And you as- 
sumed that if you trim capacity to balance with market demand 
you won't affect throughput or inventory," he says. "But, in fact, 
that assumption—which is practically universal in the western 
business world—is totally wrong." 
"How do you know it's wrong?" 
"For one thing, there is a mathematical proof which could 
clearly show that when capacity is trimmed exactly to marketing 
demands, no more and no less, throughput goes down, while 
inventory goes through the roof," he says. "And because inven- 
tory goes up, the carrying cost of inventory—which is operational 
expense—goes up. So it's questi onable whether you can even ful- 
fill the intended reduction in your total operational expense, the 
one measurement you ex pected to improve." 
"How can that be?" 
"Because of the combinations of two phenomena which are 
found in every plant," he says. "One phenomenon is called 'de- 
pendent events.' Do you know what I mean by that term? I mean 
that an event, or a series of ev ents, must take place before an- 
Captured by Plamen T.
93
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementother can begin . . . the subsequent event depends upon the ones 
prior to it. You follow?" 
"Yeah, sure," I say. "But what's the big deal about that?" 
"The big deal occurs when dependent events are in combi- 
nation with another phenomenon calle d 'statistical fluctuations,'' 
he says. "Do you know what those are?" 
I shrug. "Fluctuations in statistics, right?" 
"Let me put it this way," he sa ys. "You know that some types 
of information can be determined  precisely. For instance, if we 
need to know the seating capacity in this restaurant, we can de- 
termine it precisely by counting the number of chairs at each 
table." 
He points around the room. 
"But there are other kinds of information we cannot pre- 
cisely predict. Like how long it w ill take the waiter to bring us our 
check. Or how long it will take the chef to make an omelet. Or 
how many eggs the kitchen will need today. These types of infor- 
mation vary from one instance to the next. They are subject to 
statistical fluctuations."  
"Yeah, but you can generally get an idea of what all those are 
going to be based on experience," I say. 
"But only within a range. Last time, the waiter brought the 
check in five minutes and 42 seconds. The time before it only 
took two minutes. And today? Who knows? Could be three, four 
hours," he says, looking arou nd. "Where the hell is he?" 
"Yeah, but if the chef is doing a banquet and he knows how 
many people are coming and he knows they're all having om- 
elets, then he knows how many eg gs he's going to need," I say. 
"Exactly?" asks Jonah. "Suppose he drops one on the floor?" 
"Okay, so he has a couple extra." 
"Most of the factors critical to running your plant success- 
fully cannot be determined precisely ahead of time," he says. 
The arm of the waiter comes between us as he puts the to- 
taled check on the table. I pull it to my side of the table. 
"All right, I agree," I say. "But in the case of a worker doing 
the same job day in, day out, thos e fluctuations average out over a 
period of time. Frankly, I can't s ee what either one of those two 
phenomena have to do with anything." 
Jonah stands up, ready to leave. 
"I'm not talking about the one or the other alone," he says, 
Captured by Plamen T.
94
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"but about the effect of the two of  them together. Which is what I 
want you to think about, because I have to go." 
"You're leaving?" I ask. 
"I have to," he says. 
"Jonah, you can't just run off like this." 
"There are clients waiting for me," he says. 
"Jonah, I don't have time for riddles. I need answers," I tell 
him. 
He puts his hand on my arm. 
"Alex, if I simply told you wh at to do, ultimately you would 
fail. You have to gain the underst anding for yourself in order to 
make the rules work," he says. 
He shakes my hand. 
"Until next time, Alex. Call me when you can tell me what 
the combination of the two phe nomena mean to your plant." 
Then he hurries away. Fuming inside, I flag down the waiter 
and hand him the check and some money. Without waiting for 
the change, I follow in the direction of Jonah out to the lobby. 
I claim my overnight bag from the bellhop at the desk where 
I checked it, and sling it over my shoulder. As I turn, I see Jonah, 
still without jacket or tie, talking to a handsome man in a blue 
pinstripe suit over by the door s to the street. They go through 
the doors together, and I trudge along a few steps behind them. 
The man leads Jonah to a black limousine waiting at the curb. As 
they approach, a chauffeur hops out to open the rear door for 
them. 
I hear the handsome man in the blue pinstripe saying as he 
gets into the limo behind Jonah, "After the facilities tour, we're 
scheduled for a meeting with the chairman and several of the 
board . . ." Waiting inside for them is a silver-haired man who 
shakes Jonah's hand. The chauffeur closes the door and returns 
to the wheel. I can see only the vague silhouettes of their heads 
behind the dark glass as the big car quietly eases into traffic. 
I get into a cab. The drivers asks, "Where to, chief?"  
Captured by Plamen T.
95
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement12 
There is a guy I heard about in UniCo who came home from 
work one night, walked in, and said, "Hi, honey, I'm home!" And 
his greeting echoed back to him from the empty rooms of his 
house. His wife had taken everything: the kids, the dog, the gold- 
fish, the furniture, the carpets, the appliances, the curtains, the 
pictures on the wall, the toothpaste, everything. Well, just about 
everything—actually, she left him two things: his clothes (which 
were in a heap on the floor of the bedroom by the closet; she had 
even taken the hangers), and a note written in lipstick on the 
bathroom mirror which said, "Good-bye, you bastard!" 
As I drive down the street to my house, that kind of vision is 
running through my mind, and has been periodically since last 
night. Before I pull into the driveway, I look at the lawn for the 
telltale signs of tracks left by the wheels of a moving van, but the 
lawn is unmarred. 
I park the Mazda in front of the garage. On my way inside, I 
peek through the glass, Julie's Acco rd is parked inside, and I look 
at the sky and silently say, "Thank You." 
She's sitting at the kitchen table, her back to me as I come in. 
I startle her. She stands up ri ght away and turns around. We 
stare at each other for a second. I can see that the rims of her eyes 
are red. 
"Hi," I say. 
"What are you doing home?" Julie asks. 
I laugh—not a nice laugh, an exasperated laugh. 
"What am / doing home? I'm looking for you!" I say. 
"Well, here I am. Take a good look," she says, frowning at 
me. 
"Yeah, right, here you are now," I say. "But what I want to 
know is where you were last night." 
"I was out," she says. 
"All night?" 
She's prepared for the question. 
"Gee, I'm surprised you even knew I was gone," she says. 
"Come on, Julie, let's cut the crap. I must have called the 
number here a hundred times last night. I was worried sick about 
Captured by Plamen T.
96
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementyou. I tried it again this morn ing and nobody answered. So I 
know you were gone all night," I say, "And, by the way, where 
were the kids?" 
"They stayed with friends," she says. 
"On a school night?" I ask. "And what about you? Did you 
stay with a friend?"  
She puts her hands on her hips. 
"Yes, as a matter of fact, I did stay with a friend," she says. 
"Man or woman?" 
Her eyes get hard on me. She takes a step forward. 
"You don't care if I'm home with the kids night after night," 
she says. "But if I go away for one  night, all of a sudden you have 
to know where I've b een, what I've done." 
"I just feel you owe me some explanation," I say. 
"How many times have you been late, or out of town, or who 
knows where?" she asks. 
"But that's business," I say. "And I always tell you where I've 
been if you ask. Now I'm  asking." 
"There's nothing to tell," she says. "All that happened was I 
went out with Jane." 
"Jane?" It takes me a minute to remember her. "You mean 
your friend from where we used to live? You drove all the way 
back there?" 
"I just had to talk to someone," she says. "By the time we'd 
finished talking, I'd had too much to drink to drive home. Any- 
way, I knew the kids were okay un til morning. So I just stayed at 
Jane's." 
"Okay, but why? How did this come over you all of a sud- 
den?" I ask her. 
"Come over me? All of a sudden? Alex, you go off and leave 
me night after night. It's no w onder that I'm lonely. Nothing 
suddenly came over me. Ever since you got into management, 
your career has come first and ev eryone else takes whatever is 
left." 
"Julie, I've just tried to make a good living for you and the 
kids," I tell her. 
"Is that all? Then why do you keep taking the promotions?" 
"What am I supposed to do, turn them down?" 
She doesn't answer. 
"Look, I put in the hours because I have to, not because I 
want to," I tell her.  
Captured by Plamen T.
97
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementShe still doesn't say anything. 
"All right, look: I promise I'll make more time for you and 
the kids," I say. "Honest, I' ll spend more time at home." 
"Al, it's not going to work. Even when you're home, you're at 
the office. Sometimes I've seen th e kids tell you something two or 
three times before you hear them." 
"It won't be like that when I ge t out of the jam I'm in right 
now," I say. 
"Do you hear what you're saying? 'When I get out of the jam 
I'm in right now.' Do you think it 's going to change? You've said 
all that before, Al. Do you know how many times we've been over 
this?" 
" O k a y ,  y o u ' r e  r i g h t .  W e  h a v e  b e e n  over it a lot of times. But, 
right now, there's noth ing I can do," I say. 
She looks up at the sky and says, "Your job has always been 
on the line. Always. So if you're  such a marginal employee, why 
do they keep giving you promotions and more money?" 
I pinch the bridge of my nose. 
"How do I make you understand t h i s , "  I  s a y .  " I ' m  n o t  u p  f o r  
another promotion or pay raise this time. This time it's different. 
Julie, you have no idea what kind of problems I've got at the 
plant." 
"And you have no idea what it's like here at home," she says. 
I say, "Okay, look, I'd like to  spend more time at home, but 
the problem is getting the time." 
"I don't need all your time," she says. "But I do need some 
of it, and so do the kids." 
"I know that. But to save this plant, I'm going to have to give 
it all I've got for the next couple of months." 
"Couldn't you at least come home for dinner most of the 
time?" she asks. "The evenings ar e when I miss you the most. All 
of us do. It's empty around here without you, even with the kids 
for company." 
"Nice to know I'm wanted. But sometimes I even need the 
evenings. I just don't have enough  time during the day to get to 
things like paperwork," I say. 
"Why don't you bring the paperwork home," she suggests. 
"Do it here. If you did that, at least we could see you. And maybe 
I could even help you with some of it." 
I lean back. "I don't know if I' ll be able to concentrate, but 
. . . okay, let's try it."  
Captured by Plamen T.
98
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementShe smiles. "You mean it?" 
"Sure, if it doesn't work, we ca n talk about it," I say. "Deal?" 
"Deal," she says. 
I lean toward her and ask, "Want to seal it with a handshake 
or a kiss?" 
She comes around the table and sits on my lap and kisses me. 
"You know, I sure missed yo u last night," I tell her. 
"Did you?" she says. "I really missed you too. I had no idea 
singles bars could be so depressing." 
"Singles bars?"  
"It was Jane's idea," she says. "Honest." 
I shake my head. "I don't want to hear about it." 
"But Jane showed me some ne w dance steps," she says. "And 
maybe this weekend—" 
I give her a squeeze. "If you wa nt to do something this week- 
end, baby, I'm all yours." 
"Great," she says and whispers in my ear, "You know, it's 
Friday, so ... why don't we start early?" 
She kissed me again. 
And I say, "Julie, I'd really love to, but . . ." 
"But?" 
"I really should check in at the plant," I say. 
She stands up. "Okay, but promise me you'll hurry home 
tonight." 
"Promise," I tell her. "Really, it 's going to be a great week- 
end." 
Captured by Plamen T.
99
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement13 
I open my eyes Saturday morning to see a drab green blur. 
The blur turns out to be my son, Dave, dressed in his Boy Scout 
uniform. He is shaking my arm. 
"Davey, what are you doing here?" I ask. 
He says, "Dad, it's seven o'clock!" 
"Seven o'clock? I'm trying to sleep. Aren't you supposed to 
be watching television or something?" 
"We'll be late," he says. 
"We will be late? For what?" 
"For the overnight hike!" he says. "Remember? You prom- 
ised me I could volunteer you to  go along and help the troop- 
master." 
I mutter something no Boy Scout should ever hear. But 
Dave isn't fazed. 
"Come on. Just get in the shower," he says, as he pulls me 
out of bed. "I packed your gear la st night. Everything's in the car 
already. We just have to get there by eight." 
I manage a last look at Julie, her eyes still shut, and the warm 
soft mattress as Davey dr ags me through the door. 
An hour and ten minutes later, my son and I arrive at the 
edge of some forest. Waiting for us is the troop: fifteen boys out- 
fitted in caps, neckerchiefs, merit badges, the works. 
Before I have time to say, "Where's the troopmaster?", the 
other few parents who happen to be lingering with the boys take 
off in their cars, all pedals to the metal. Looking around, I see 
that I am the only adult in sight. 
"Our troopmaster couldn't make it," says one of the boys. 
"How come?" 
"He's sick," says another kid next to him. 
"Yeah, his hemorrhoids are acting up," says the first. "So it 
looks like you're in charge now." 
"What are we supposed to do, Mr. Rogo?" asks the other kid. 
Well, at first I'm a little mad at  having all this foisted upon 
me. But then the idea of having to supervise a bunch of kids 
doesn't daunt me—after all, I do that every day at the plant. So I 
gather everyone around. We look  at a map and discuss the objec- 
tives for this expedition into the perilous wilderness before us. 
Captured by Plamen T.
100
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementThe plan, I learn, is for the troop to hike through the forest 
following a blazed trail to someplace called "Devil's Gulch." 
There we are to bivouac for the evening. In the morning we are 
to break camp and make our way back to the point of departure, 
where Mom and Dad are supposed to  be waiting for little Freddy 
and Johnny and friends to walk out of the woods. 
First, we have to get to Devil's Gulch, which happens to be 
about ten miles away. So I line up  the troop. They've all got their 
rucksacks on their backs. Map in hand, I put myself at the front 
of the line in order to lead the way, and off we go. 
The weather is fantastic. The sun is shining through the 
trees. The skies are blue. It's breez y and the temperature is a little 
on the cool side, but once we get into the woods, it's just right for 
walking. 
The trail is easy to follow beca use there are blazes (splotches 
of yellow paint) on the tree trunks ev ery 10 yards or so. On either 
side, the undergrowth is thick. We have to hike in single file. 
I suppose I'm walking at about two miles per hour, which is 
about how fast the average person walks. At this rate, I think to 
myself, we should cover ten miles in about five hours. My watch 
tells me it's almost 8:30 now. Allowing an hour and a half for 
breaks and for lunch, we should arrive at Devil's Gulch by three 
o'clock, no sweat. 
After a few minutes, I turn and look back. The column of 
scouts has spread out to some degree from the close spacing we 
started with. Instead of a yard or so between boys, there are now 
larger gaps, some a little larger  than others. I keep walking. 
But I look back again after a few hundred yards, and the 
column is stretched out much farther. And a couple of big gaps 
have appeared. I can barely see the kid at the end of the line. 
I decide it's better if I'm at th e end of the line instead of at 
the front. That way I know I'll be able to keep an eye on the 
whole column, and make sure nobody gets left behind. So I wait 
for the first boy to catch up to me, and I ask him his name. 
"I'm Ron," he says. 
"Ron, I want you to lead th e column," I tell him, handing 
over the map. "Just keep following this trail, and set a moderate 
pace. Okay?" 
"Right, Mr. Rogo." 
And he sets off at what seems to be a reasonable pace. 
Captured by Plamen T.
101
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Everybody stay behind Ron!" I call back to the others. "No- 
body passes Ron, because he's got the map. Understand?" 
Everybody nods, waves. Everybody understands. 
I wait by the side of the trail as the troop passes. My son, 
Davey, goes by talking with a fr iend who walks close behind him. 
Now that he's with his buddies, Dave doesn't want to know me. 
He's too cool for that. Five or six more come along, all of them 
keeping up without any problems. Then there is a gap, followed 
by a couple more scouts. After th em, another, even larger gap has 
occurred. I look down the trail. An d I see this fat kid. He already 
looks a little winded. Behind him is the rest of the troop. 
"What's your name?" I ask as the fat kid draws closer. 
"Herbie," says the fat kid. 
"You okay, Herbie?" 
"Oh, sure, Mr. Rogo," says Herbie. "Boy, it's hot out, isn't 
it?" 
Herbie continues up the trail and  the others follow. Some of 
them look as if they'd like to go faster, but they can't get around 
Herbie. I fall in behind the last boy. The line stretches out in 
front of me, and most of the ti me, unless we're going over a hill 
or around a sharp bend in the trail, I can see everybody. The 
column seems to settle in to a comfortable rhythm. 
Not that the scenery is boring,  but after a while I begin to 
think about other things. Like Ju lie, for instance. I really had 
wanted to spend this weekend wi th her. But I'd forgotten all 
about this hiking business with Dave. "Typical of you," I guess 
she'd say. I don't know how I'm ev er going to get the time I need 
to spend with her. The only saving grace about this hike is that 
she ought to understand I have to be with Dave. 
And then there is the conversa tion I had with Jonah in New 
York. I haven't had any time to think about that. I'm rather curi- 
ous to know what a physics teacher is doing riding around in 
limousines with corporate heavyweights. Nor do I understand 
what he was trying to make out of those two items he described. I 
mean, "dependent events" . . . "statistical fluctuations"—so 
what? They're both quite mundane. 
Obviously we have dependent events in manufacturing. All it 
means is that one operation has to be done before a second oper- 
ation can be performed. Parts are made in a sequence of steps. 
Machine A has to finish Step One before Worker B can proceed 
with Step Two. All the parts have to be finished before we can 
Captured by Plamen T.
102
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementassemble the product. The product has to be assembled before we 
can ship it. And so on. 
But you find dependent events in any process, and not just 
those in a factory. Driving a car requires a sequence of dependent 
events. So does the hike we're taki ng now. In order to arrive at 
Devil's Gulch, a trail has to be walked. Up front, Ron has to walk 
the trail before Davey can walk it. Davey has to walk the trail 
before Herbie can walk it. In orde r for me to walk the trail, the 
boy in front of me has to walk it first. It's a simple case of depen- 
dent events. 
And statistical fluctuations? 
I look up and notice that the boy in front of me is going a 
little faster than I have been. He's  a few feet farther ahead of me 
than he was a minute ago. So I take some bigger steps to catch 
up. Then, for a second, I'm too cl ose to him, so I slow down. 
There: if I'd been measuring my stride, I would have re- 
corded statistical fluctuations. Bu t, again, what's the big deal? 
If I say that I'm walking at the rate of "two miles per hour," I 
don't mean I'm walking exactly at a constant rate of two miles per 
hour every instant. Sometimes I'll be going 2.5 miles per hour; 
sometimes maybe I'll be walking at only 1.2 miles per hour. The 
rate is going to fluctuate accord ing to the length and speed of 
each step. But over time and distance, I should be averaging about 
two miles per hour, more or less. 
The same thing happens in the pl a n t .  H o w  l o n g  d o e s  i t  t a k e  
to solder the wire leads on a transformer? Well, if you get out 
your stopwatch and time the operation over and over again, you 
might find that it takes, let's sa y, 4.3 minutes on the average. But 
the actual time on any given instance may range between 2.1 
minutes up to 6.4 minutes. And n obody in advance can say, "This 
one will take 2.1 minutes . . . this one will take 5.8 minutes." 
Nobody can predict that information. 
So what's wrong with that? Nothing as far as I can see. Any- 
way, we don't have any choice. What else are we going to use in 
place of an "average" or an "estimate"? 
I find I'm almost stepping on the boy in front of me. We've 
slowed down somewhat. It's becaus e we're climbing a long, fairly 
steep hill. All of us are backed up behind Herbie. 
"Come on, Herpes!" says one of the kids. 
Herpes? 
"Yeah, Herpes, let's move it," says another.  
Captured by Plamen T.
103
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Okay, enough of that," I say to the persecutors. 
Then Herbie reaches the top. He turns around. His face is 
red from the climb. 
"Atta boy, Herbie!" I say to encourage him. "Let's keep it 
moving!" 
Herbie disappears over the crest. The others continue the 
climb, and I trudge behind them until I get to the top. Pausing 
there, I look down the trail. 
Holy cow! Where's Ron? He must  be half a mile ahead of us. 
I can see a couple of boys in front of Herbie, and everyone else is 
lost in the distance. I cup my hands over my mouth. 
"HEY! LET'S GO UP THERE! LET'S CLOSE RANKS!" I 
yell. "DOUBLE TIME! DOUBLE TIME!" 
Herbie eases into a trot. The ki ds behind him start to run. I 
jog after them. Rucksacks and canteens and sleeping bags are 
bouncing and shaking with every step. And Herbie—I don't 
know what this kid is carrying, bu t it sounds like he's got a junk- 
yard on his back with all the clattering and clanking he makes 
when he runs. After a couple hundred yards, we still haven't 
caught up. Herbie is slowing down . The kids are yelling at him to 
hurry up. I'm huffing and puffing along. Finally I can see Ron off 
in the distance. 
"HEY RON!" I shout. "HOLD UP!" 
The call is relayed up the trail by the other boys. Ron, who 
probably heard the call the first time, turns and looks back. 
Herbie, seeing relief in sight, sl ows to a fast walk. And so do the 
rest of us. As we approach, all heads are turned our way. 
"Ron, I thought I told you to set a moderate pace," I say. 
"But I did!" he protests. 
"Well, let's just all try to stay together next time," I tell them. 
"Hey, Mr. Rogo, whadd'ya say we  take five?" asks Herbie. 
"Okay, let's take a break," I tell them. 
Herbie falls over beside the trail, his tongue hanging out. 
Everyone reaches for canteens. I find the most comfortable log in 
sight and sit down. After a few minutes, Davey comes over and 
sits down next to me. 
"You're doing great, Dad," he says. 
"Thanks. How far do yo u think we've come?" 
"About two miles," he says. 
"Is that all?" I ask. "It feels like we ought to be there by now. 
We must have covered more distance than two miles." 
Captured by Plamen T.
104
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Not according to the map Ron has," he says. 
"Oh," I say. "Well, I guess we'd better get a move on." 
The boys are already lining up. 
"All right, let's go," I say. 
We start out again. The trail is straight here, so I can see 
everyone. We haven't gone thirty yards before I notice it starting 
all over again. The line is spre ading out; gaps between the boys 
are widening. Dammit, we're going to be running and stopping 
all day long if this keeps up. Half  the troop is liable to get lost if 
we can't stay together. 
I've got to put an end to this. 
The first one I check is Ron. But Ron, indeed, is setting a 
steady, "average" pace for the troop—a pace nobody should have 
any trouble with. I look back down the line, and all of the boys 
are walking at about the same rate as Ron. And Herbie? He's not 
the problem anymore. Maybe he felt responsible for the last de- 
lay, because now he seems to be making a special effort to keep 
up. He's right on the ass of  the kid in front of him. 
If we're all walking at about th e same pace, why is the dis- 
tance between Ron, at the front of  the line, and me, at the end of 
the line, increasing? 
Statistical fluctuations? 
Nah, couldn't be. The fluctuations should be averaging out. 
We're all moving at about the same speed, so that should mean 
the distance between any of us w ill vary somewhat, but will even 
out over a period of time. The distance between Ron and me 
should also expand and contract  within a certain range, but 
should average about the same throughout the hike. 
But it isn't. As long as each of us is maintaining a normal, 
moderate pace like Ron, the length  of the column is increasing. 
The gaps between us are expanding. 
Except between Herbie and the kid in front of him. 
So how is he doing it? I watch him. Every time Herbie gets a 
step behind, he runs for an extra step. Which means he's actually 
expending more energy than Ron or the others at the front of the 
line in order to maintain the sa me relative speed. I'm wondering 
how long he'll be able to k eep up his walk-run routine. 
Yet . . . why can't we all just walk at the same pace as Ron 
and stay together? 
I'm watching the line when so mething up ahead catches my 
eye. I see Davey slow down for a few seconds. He's adjusting his 
Captured by Plamen T.
105
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementpackstraps. In front of him, R on continues onward, oblivious. A 
gap of ten . . . fifteen . . . twenty feet opens up. Which means 
the entire line has grown by 20 feet. 
That's when I begin to understand what's happening. 
Ron is setting the pace. Every time someone moves slower 
than Ron, the line lengthens. It wouldn't even have to be as obvi- 
ous as when Dave slowed down. If one of the boys takes a step 
that's half an inch shorter than  the one Ron took, the length of 
the whole line could be affected. 
But what happens when someone moves faster than Ron? 
Aren't the longer or faster steps supposed to make up for the 
spreading? Don't the differences average out? 
Suppose I walk faster. Can I shor ten the length of the line? 
Well, between me and the kid ahead of me is a gap of about five 
feet. If he continues walking at th e same rate, and if I speed up, I 
can reduce the gap—and maybe re duce the total length of the 
column, depending upon what's happening up ahead. But I can 
only do that until I'm bumping the kid's rucksack (and if I did 
that he'd sure as hell tell his moth e r ) .  S o  I  h a v e  t o  s l o w  d o w n  t o  
his rate. 
Once I've closed the gap between us, I can't go any faster 
than the rate at which the kid in front of me is going. And he 
ultimately can't go any faster than the kid in front of him. And so 
on up the line to Ron. Which means that, except for Ron, each of 
our speeds depends upon the speeds of those in front of us in the 
line. 
It's starting to make sense. Our hike is a set of dependent 
events ... in combination with st atistical fluctuations. Each of 
us is fluctuating in speed, faster  and slower. But the ability to go 
faster than average is restricted . It depends upon all the others 
ahead of me in the line. So even if I could walk five miles per 
hour, I couldn't do it if the boy in front of me could only walk two 
miles per hour. And even if the kid directly in front of me could 
walk that fast, neither of us coul d do it unless all the boys in the 
line were moving at five miles per hour at the same time. 
So I've got limits on how fast I can go—both my own (I can 
only go so fast for so long before  I fall over and pant to death) 
and those of the others on the hike. However, there is no limit on 
my ability to slow down. Or on anyo ne else's ability to slow down. 
Or stop. And if any of us did, the line would extend indefinitely. 
What's happening isn't an aver aging out of the fluctuations 
Captured by Plamen T.
106
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementin our various speeds, but an accumulation of the fluctuations. And 
mostly it's an accumulation of slowness— because dependency limits 
the opportunities for higher fluctuations. And that's why the line is 
spreading. We can make the line shrink only by having everyone 
in the back of the line move much faster than Ron's average over 
some distance. 
Looking ahead, I can see that how  much distance each of us 
has to make up tends to be a ma tter of where we are in the line. 
Davey only has to make up for his own slower than average fluc- 
tuations relative to Ron—that twenty feet or so which is the gap in 
front of him. But for Herbie to keep the length of the line from 
growing, he would have to make up  for his own fluctuations plus 
those of all the kids in front of him. And here I am at the end of 
the line. To make the total length  of the line contract, I have to 
move faster than average for a distance equal to all the excess 
space between all the boys. I have  t o  m a k e  u p  f o r  t h e  a c c u m u l a -  
tion of all their slowness. 
Then I start to wonder what th i s  c o u l d  m e a n  t o  m e  o n  t h e  
job. In the plant, we've definitely got both dependent events and 
statistical fluctuations. And here on the trail we've got both of 
them. What if I were to say that this troop of boys is analogous to 
a manufacturing system . . . sort of a model. In fact, the troop 
does produce a product; we produce "walk trail." Ron begins 
production by consuming the unwalk ed trail before him, which is 
the equivalent of raw materials. So Ron processes the trail first by 
walking over it, then Davey has to  process it next, followed by the 
boy behind him, and so on back to Herbie and the others and on 
to me. 
Each of us is like an operation which has to be performed to 
produce a product in the plant; each of us is one of a set of 
dependent events. Does it matter what order we're in? Well, 
somebody has to be first and somebody else has to be last. So we 
have dependent events no matter if we switch the order of the 
boys. 
I'm the last operation. Only after I have walked the trail is 
the product "sold," so to speak. And that would have to be our 
throughput—not the rate at which Ron walks the trail, but the 
rate at which I do. 
What about the amount of trail between Ron and me? It has 
to be inventory. Ron is consuming raw materials, so the trail the 
rest of us are walking is inventory until it passes behind me. 
Captured by Plamen T.
107
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementAnd what is operational expense? It's whatever lets us turn 
inventory into throughput, which in our case would be the en- 
ergy the boys need to walk. I can't really quantify that for the 
model, except that I know when I'm getting tired. 
If the distance between Ron and me is expanding, it can only 
mean that inventory is increasing. Throughput is my rate of 
walking. Which is influenced by the fluctuating rates of the oth- 
ers. Hmmm. So as the slower than average fluctuations accumu- 
late, they work their way back to me. Which means I have to slow 
down. Which means that, relative to the growth of inventory, 
throughput for the entire system goes down. 
And operational expense? I'm not sure. For UniCo, when- 
ever inventory goes up, carrying costs on the inventory go up as 
well. Carrying costs are a part of operational expense, so that 
measurement also must be going up. In terms of the hike, opera- 
tional expense is increasing any time we hurry to catch up, be- 
cause we expend more energy  than we otherwise would. 
Inventory is going up. Throug hput is going down. And op- 
erational expense is probably increasing. 
Is that what's happe ning in my plant? 
Yes, I think it is. 
Just then, I look up and see that I'm nearly running into the 
kid in front of me. 
Ah ha! Okay! Here's proof I must have overlooked some- 
thing in the analogy. The line in front of me is contracting rather 
than expanding. Everything must be averaging out after all. I'm 
going to lean to the side and see Ron walking his average two- 
mile-an-hour pace. 
But Ron is not walking the average pace. He's standing still 
at the edge of the trail. 
"How come we're stopping?" 
He says, "Time for lunch, Mr. Rogo."  
Captured by Plamen T.
108
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement14 
"But we're not supposed to be having lunch here," says one 
of the kids. "We're not supposed to eat until we're farther down 
the trail, when we reach the Rampage River." 
"According to the schedule the troopmaster gave us, we're 
supposed to eat lunch at 12:00 noon," says Ron. 
"And it is now 12:00 noon," Herbie says, pointing to his 
watch. "So we have to eat lunch." 
"But we're supposed to be at  Rampage River by now and 
we're not." 
"Who cares?" says Ron. "This is a great spot for lunch. Look 
around." 
Ron has a point. The trail is taki ng us through a park, and it 
so happens that we're passing through a picnic area. There are 
tables, a water pump, garbage ca ns, barbecue grills—all the ne- 
cessities. (This is my kind of wilderness I'll have you know.) 
"Okay," I say. "Let's just take a vote to see who wants to eat 
now. Anyone who's hungry, raise your hand." 
Everyone raises his hand; it's unanimous. We stop for lunch. 
I sit down at one of the tables and ponder a few thoughts as I 
eat a sandwich. What's bothering me now is that, first of all, there 
is no real way I could operate a manufacturing plant without 
having dependent events and statistical fluctuations. I can't get 
away from that combination. Bu t there must be a way to over- 
come the effects. I mean, obviously, we'd all go out of business if 
inventory was always increasing , and throughput was always de- 
creasing. 
What if I had a balanced plan t, the kind that Jonah was 
saying managers are constantly trying to achieve, a plant with 
every resource exactly equal in capacity to demand from the mar- 
ket? In fact, couldn't that be the answer to the problem? If I 
could get capacity perfectly balanced with demand, wouldn't my 
excess inventory go away? Wouldn't  my shortages of certain parts 
disappear? And, anyway, how could Jonah be right and every- 
body else be wrong? Managers have always trimmed capacity to 
cut costs and increase profits; that's the game. 
I'm beginning to think maybe th is hiking model has thrown 
Captured by Plamen T.
109
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementme off. I mean, sure, it shows me the effect of statistical fluctua- 
tions and dependent events in combination. But is it a balanced 
system? Let's say the demand on us is to walk two miles every 
hour—no more, no less. Could I adjust the capacity of each kid so 
he would be able to walk two miles per hour and no faster? If I 
could, I'd simply keep everyone moving constantly at the pace he 
should go—by yelling, whip-cracking, money, whatever—and ev- 
erything would be perfectly balanced. 
The problem is how can I realis tically trim the capacity of 
fifteen kids? Maybe I could tie each one's ankles with pieces of 
rope so that each would only take the same size step. But that's a 
little kinky. Or maybe I could clone myself fifteen times so I have 
a troop of Alex Rogos with exactl y the same trail-walking capac- 
ity. But that isn't practical until we get some advancements in 
cloning technology. Or maybe I could set up some other kind of 
model, a more controllable one, to let me see beyond any doubt 
what goes on. 
I'm puzzling over how to do this when I notice a kid sitting at 
one of the other tables, rolling a pair of dice. I guess he's practic- 
ing for his next trip to Vegas or something. I don't mind—al- 
though I'm sure he won't get any merit badges for shooting craps 
—but the dice give me an idea. I get up and go over to him. 
"Say, mind if I borrow those for a while?" I ask. 
The kid shrugs, then hands them over. 
I go back to the table again and roll the dice a couple of 
times. Yes, indeed: statistical fluctuations. Every time I roll the 
dice, I get a random number that is predictable only within a 
certain range, specifically numb ers one to six on each die. Now 
what I need next for the model is a set of dependent events. 
After scavenging around for a mi nute or two, I find a box of 
match sticks (the strike-anywhere kind), and some bowls from the 
aluminum mess kit. I set the bowls in a line along the length of 
the table and put the matches at one end. And this gives me a 
model of a perfectly balanced system. 
While I'm setting this up and figuring out how to operate the 
model, Dave wanders over with a friend of his. They stand by the 
table and watch me roll the die and move matches around. 
"What are you doing?" asks Dave. 
"Well, I'm sort of inventing a game," I say. 
"A game? Really?" says his friend. "Can we play it, Mr. 
Rogo?" - 
Captured by Plamen T.
110
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementWhy not? 
"Sure you can," I say. 
All of a sudden Dave is interested. 
"Hey, can I play too?" he asks. 
"Yeah, I guess I'll let you in," I tell him. "In fact, why don't 
you round up a couple more of th e guys to help us do this." 
While they go get the others, I figure out the details. The 
system I've set up is intended to  "process" matches. It does this 
by moving a quantity of match sticks out of their box, and 
through each of the bowls in succession. The dice determine how 
many matches can be moved from one bowl to the next. The dice 
represent the capacity of each resource, each bowl; the set of 
bowls are my dependent events, my stages of production. Each 
has exactly the same capacity as the others, but its actual yield will 
fluctuate somewhat. 
In order to keep those fluctuations minimal, however, I de- 
cide to use only one of the dice. This allows the fluctuations to 
range from one to six. So from the first bowl, I can move to the 
next bowls in line any quantity of matches ranging from a mini- 
mum of one to a maximum of six. 
Throughput in this system is the speed at which matches 
come out of the last bowl. Invent ory consists of the total number 
of matches in all of the bowls at any time. And I'm going to 
assume that market demand is ex actly equal to the average num- 
ber of matches that the system can process. Production capacity 
of each resource and market demand are perfectly in balance. So 
that means I now have a model of a perfectly balanced manufac- 
turing plant. 
Five of the boys decide to play. Besides Dave, there are Andy, 
Ben, Chuck, and Evan. Each of them sits behind one of the bowls. 
I find some paper and a pencil to record what happens. Then I 
explain what they're supposed to do. 
"The idea is to move as many  matches as you can from your 
bowl to the bowl on your right. Wh en it's your turn, you roll the 
die, and the number that comes up is the number of matches you 
can move. Got it?" 
They all nod. "But you can only move as many matches as 
you've got in your bowl. So if you roll a five and you only have 
two matches in your bowl, then you can only move two matches. 
And if it comes to your turn and you don't have any matches, 
then naturally you can't move any."  
Captured by Plamen T.
111
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementThey nod again. 
"How many matches do you think we can move through the 
line each time we go thro ugh the cycle?" I ask them. 
Perplexity descends over their faces. 
"Well, if you're able to move a maximum of six and a mini- 
mum of one when it's your turn , what's the average number you 
ought to be moving?" I ask them. 
"Three," says Andy. 
"No, it won't be three," I te ll them. "The mid-point between 
one and six isn't three." 
I draw some numbers on my paper. 
"Here, look," I say, and I show them this: 
123456 
And I explain that 3.5 is really the average of those six num- 
bers. 
"So how many matches do you think each of you should 
have moved on the average after we've gone through the cycle a 
number of times?" I ask. 
"Three and a half per turn," says Andy. 
"And after ten cycles?" 
"Thirty-five," says Chuck. 
"And after twenty cycles?" 
"Seventy," says Ben. 
"Okay, let's see if we can do it," I say. 
Then I hear a long sigh from the end of the table. Evan looks 
at me. 
"Would you mind if I don't play this game, Mr. Rogo?" he 
asks. 
"How come?" 
"Cause I think it's going to be kind of boring," he says. 
"Yeah," says Chuck. "Just moving matches around. Like who 
cares, you know?" 
"I think I'd rather go tie some knots," says Evan. 
"Tell you what," I say. "Just to make it more interesting, we'll 
have a reward. Let's say that everybody has a quota of 3.5 
matches per turn. Anybody who do es better than that, who aver- 
ages more than 3.5 matches, doesn't have to wash any dishes 
tonight. But anybody who averages less than 3.5 per turn, has to 
do extra dishes after dinner." 
"Yeah, all right!" says Evan. 
"You got it!" says Dave.  
Captured by Plamen T.
112
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementThey're all excited now. They're  practicing rolling the die. 
Meanwhile, I set up a grid on a shee t of paper. What I plan to do 
is record the amount that each of them deviates from the average. 
They all start at zero. If the roll of the die is a 4, 5, or 6 then I'll 
record—respectively—a gain of .5, 1.5, or 2.5. And if the roll is a 
1 ,  2 ,  o r  3  t h e n  I ' l l  r e c o r d  a  l o ss of-2.5, -1.5, or -.5 respectively. 
The deviations, of course, have to  be cumulative; if someone is 
2.5 above, for example, his starting point on the next turn is 2.5, 
not zero. That's the way it  would happen in the plant. 
"Okay, everybody ready?" I ask. 
"All set." 
I give the die to Andy. 
He rolls a two. So he takes two matches from the box and 
puts them in Ben's bowl. By rollin g a two, Andy is down 1.5 from 
his quota of 3.5 and I note the deviation on the chart. 
Ben rolls next and the die comes up as a four. 
"Hey, Andy," he says. "I need a couple more matches." 
"No, no, no, no," I say. "The game does not work that way. 
You can only pass the matches that are in your bowl." 
"But I've only got two," says Ben. 
"Then you can only pass two." 
"Oh," says Ben. 
And he passes his two matches to Chuck. I record a deviation 
of-1.5 for him too. 
Chuck rolls next. He gets a five. But, again, there are only 
two matches he can move. 
"Hey, this isn't fair!" says Chuck. 
"Sure it is," I tell him. "The n a m e  o f  t h e  g a m e  i s  t o  m o v e  
matches. If both Andy and Ben had  rolled five's, you'd have five 
matches to pass. But they didn't. So you don't." Chuck gives a 
dirty look to Andy. 
"Next time, roll a bigger number," Chuck says. 
"Hey, what could I do!" says Andy. 
"Don't worry," Ben says conf idently. "We'll catch up." 
Chuck passes his measly two matches down to Dave, and I 
record a deviation of-1.5 for Ch uck as well. We watch as Dave 
rolls the die. His roll is only a one. So he passes one match down 
to Evan. Then Evan also rolls a one. He takes the one match out 
of his bowl and puts it on the end of the table. For both Dave and 
Evan, I write a deviation of-2.5. 
"Okay, let's see if we can do better next time," I say. 
Captured by Plamen T.
113
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement 
Andy shakes the die in his hand  for what seems like an hour. 
Everyone is yelling at him to roll. The die goes spinning onto the 
table. We all look. It's a six. 
"All right!" 
"Way to go, Andy!" 
He takes six match sticks out of the box and hands them to 
Ben. I record a gain of+2.5 for him, which puts his score at 1.0 
on the grid. 
Ben takes the die and he too rolls a six. More cheers. He 
passes all six matches to Chuck. I record the same score for Ben 
as for Andy. 
But Chuck rolls a three. So af ter he passes three matches to 
Dave, he still has three left in his bowl. And I note a loss of-0.5 
on the chart. 
N o w  D a v e  r o l l s  t h e  d i e ;  i t  c o m e s  u p  a s  a  s i x .  B u t  h e  o n l y  h a s  
four matches to pass—the three that Chuck just passed to him 
and one from the last round. So he passes four to Evan. I write 
down a gain of +0.5 for him. 
Evan gets a three on the die. So the lone match on the end of 
the table is joined by three more. Evan still has one left in his 
bowl. And I record a loss of-0.5 for Evan. 
At the end of two rounds, this is what the chart looks like. 
 
Captured by Plamen T.
114
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementWe keep going. The die spin s on the table and passes from 
hand to hand. Matches come out of the box and move from bowl 
to bowl. Andy's rolls are—what else?—very average, no steady 
run of high or low numbers. He is able to meet the quota and 
then some. At the other end of th e table, it's a different story. 
"Hey, let's keep those matches coming." 
"Yeah, we need more down here." 
"Keep rolling sixes, Andy." 
"It isn't Andy, it's Chuck. Lo ok at him, he's got five." 
After four turns, I have to add more numbers—negative 
numbers—to the bottom of the char t. Not for Andy or for Ben or 
for Chuck, but for Dave and Evan. For them, it looks like there is 
no bottom deep enough. 
After five rounds, the chart looks like this: 
 
Captured by Plamen T.
115
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"How am I doing, Mr. Rogo?" Evan asks me. 
"Well, Evan . . . ever hear  the story of the Titanic?" 
He looks depressed. 
"You've got five rounds left," I .tell him. "Maybe you can pull 
through." 
"Yeah, remember the law of averages," says Chuck. 
"If I have to wash dishes beca use you guys didn't give me 
enough matches . . ." says Evan,  letting vague implications of 
threat hang in the air. 
"I'm doing my job up here," says Andy. 
"Yeah, what's wrong with you guys down there?" asks Ben. 
"Hey, I just now got enough of them to pass," says Dave. 
"I've hardly had any before." 
Indeed, some of the inventory which had been stuck in the 
first three bowls had finally moved to Dave. But now it gets stuck 
in Dave's bowl. The couple of higher rolls he had in the first five 
rounds are averaging out. Now he's getting low rolls just when he 
has inventory to move. 
"C'mon, Dave, gimme some matches," says Evan. 
Dave rolls a one. 
"Aw, Dave! One match!" 
"Andy, you hear what we're having for dinner tonight?" asks 
Ben. 
"I think it's spaghetti," says Andy. 
"Ah, man, that'll be a mess to dean up." 
"Yeah, glad I won't have to do it," says Andy. 
"You just wait," says Evan. "You  just wait 'til Dave gets some 
good numbers for a change." 
But it doesn't get any better. 
"How are we doing now, Mr. Rogo?" asks Evan. 
"I think there's a Brillo pad with your name on it." 
"All right! No dishes tonight!" shouts Andy. 
After ten rounds, this is how the chart looks . . . 
I look at the chart. I still can hardly believe it. It was a bal- 
anced system. And yet throughput went down. Inventory went 
up. And operational expense? If there had been carrying costs on 
the matches, operational expense would have gone up too. 
What if this had been a real plant—with real customers? 
How many units did we manage to  ship? We expected to ship 
thirty-five. But what was our actual throughput? It was only 
twenty. About half of what we needed. And it was nowhere near 
Captured by Plamen T.
116
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement 
Captured by Plamen T.
117
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementthe maximum potential of each stat ion. If this had been an actual 
plant, half of our orders—or more—would have been late. We'd 
never be able to promise specific delivery dates. And if we did, 
our credibility with customers would drop through the floor. 
All of that sounds familiar, doesn't it? 
"Hey, we can't stop now!"  Evan is clamoring. 
"Yea, let's keep playing," says Dave. 
"Okay," says Andy. "What do you want to bet this time? I'll 
take you on." 
"Let's play for who cooks dinner," says Ben. 
"Great," says Dave. 
"You're on," says Evan. 
They roll the die for another twenty rounds, but I run out of 
paper at the bottom of the page while tracking Dave and Evan. 
What was I expecting? My initial chart ranged from +6 to -6. I 
guess I was expecting some fairly  regular highs and lows, a nor- 
mal sine curve. But I didn't get that. Instead, the chart looks like 
I'm tracing a cross-section of the Grand Canyon. Inventory 
moves through the system not in manageable flow, but in waves. 
The mound of matches in Dave's bowl passes to Evan's and onto 
the table finally—only to be repl aced by another accumulating 
wave. And the system gets further and further behind schedule. 
"Want to play again?" asks Andy. 
"Yeah, only this time I get your seat," says Evan. 
"No way!" says Andy. 
Chuck is in the middle shaking his head, already resigned to 
defeat. Anyway, it's time to head on up the trail again. 
"Some game that turned out to be," says Evan. 
"Right, some game," I mumble.  
Captured by Plamen T.
118
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement15 
For a while, I watch the line ahead  of me. As usual, the gaps 
are widening. I shake my head. If I can't even deal with this in a 
simple hike, how am I going to  deal with it in the plant? 
What went wrong back there? Why didn't the balanced 
model work? For about an hour or so, I keep thinking about what 
happened. Twice I have to stop the troop to let us catch up. 
Sometime after the second stop, I've fairly well sorted out what 
happened. 
There was no reserve. When th e kids downstream in the 
balanced model got behind, they had no extra capacity to make 
up for the loss. And as the negati ve deviations accumulated, they 
got deeper and deeper in the hole. 
Then a long-lost memory from way back in some math class 
in school comes to mind. It has to do with something called a 
covariance, the impact of one variable upon others in the same 
group. A mathematical principle says that in a linear dependency 
of two or more variables, the fluc tuations of the variables down 
the line will fluctuate around th e maximum deviation established 
by any preceding variables. That explains what happened in the 
balanced model. 
Fine, but what do I do about it? 
On the trail, when I see how far behind we are, I can tell 
everyone to hurry up. Or I can te ll Ron to slow down or stop. 
And we close ranks. Inside a plant, when the departments get 
behind and work-in-process inventory starts building up, people 
are shifted around, they're put on overtime, managers start to 
crack the whip, product moves out the door, and inventories 
slowly go down again. Yeah, that 's it: we run to catch up. (We 
always run, never stop; the othe r option, having some workers 
idle, is taboo.) So why can't we catch up at my plant? It feels like 
we're always running. We're running  so hard we're out of breath. 
I look up the trail. Not only are the gaps still occurring, but 
they're expanding faster than ever! Then I notice something 
weird. Nobody in the column is stuck on the heels of anybody 
else. Except me. I'm stuck behind Herbie. 
Herbie? What's he doing back here?  
Captured by Plamen T.
119
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementI lean to the side so I can see the line better. Ron i's no longer 
leading the troop; he's a third of the way back now. And Davey is 
ahead of him. I don't know who's leading. I can't see that far. 
Well, son of a gun. The little bastards changed their marching 
order on me. 
"Herbie, how come you're all the way back here?" I ask. 
"Oh, hi, Mr. Rogo," says Herbie  as he turns around. "I just 
thought I'd stay back here with you. This way I won't hold any- 
body up." 
He's walking backwards as he says this. 
"Hu-huh, well, that's though tful of you. Watch out!" 
Herbie trips on a tree root and goes flying onto his backside. 
I help him up. 
"Are you okay?" I ask. 
"Yeah, but I guess I'd better walk forwards, huh?" he says. 
"Kind of hard to talk that way though." 
"That's okay, Herbie," I tell hi m as we start walking again. 
"You just enjoy the hike. I've  got lots to think about." 
And that's no lie. Because I think Herbie may have just put 
me onto something. My guess is that Herbie, unless he's trying 
very hard, as he was before lunch, is the slowest one in the troop. 
I mean, he seems like a good ki d and everything. He's clearly 
very conscientious—but he's slower than all the others. (Some- 
body's got to be, right?) So when Herbie is walking at what I'll 
loosely call his "optimal" pace—a pace that's comfortable to him 
—he's going to be moving slower than anybody who happens to 
be behind him. Like me. 
At the moment, Herbie isn't limiting the progress of anyone 
except me. In fact, all the boys have arranged themselves (delib- 
erately or accidentally, I'm not sure which) in an order that allows 
every one of them to walk without restriction. As I look up the 
line, I can't see anybody who is being held back by anybody else. 
The order in which they've put themselves has placed the fastest 
kid at the front of the line, and th e slowest at the back of the line. 
In effect, each of them, like Herbie, has found an optimal pace 
f o r  h i m s e l f .  I f  t h i s  w e r e  m y  p l a n t ,  i t  w o u l d  b e  a s  i f  t h e r e  w e r e  a  
never-ending supply of work—no idle time. 
But look at what's happening:  the length of the line is 
spreading farther and faster than ever before. The gaps between 
the boys are widening. The closer to the front of the line, the 
wider the gaps become and the faster they expand. 
Captured by Plamen T.
120
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementYou can look at it this way, to o: Herbie is advancing at his 
own speed, which happens to be slower than my potential speed. 
But because of dependency, my maximum speed is the rate at 
which Herbie is walking. My rate is throughput. Herbie's rate 
governs mine. So Herbie really is determining the maximum 
throughput. 
My head feels as though it's going to take off. 
Because, see, it really do esn't matter how fast any one of us 
can go, or does go. Somebody up there, whoever is leading right 
now, is walking faster than average,  say, three miles per hour. So 
what! Is his speed helping the troop as a whole to move faster, to 
gain more throughput? No way. Each of the other boys down the 
line is walking a little bit faster than the kid directly behind him. 
Are any of them helping to move  the troop faster? Absolutely not. 
Herbie is walking at his own slow er speed. He is the one who is 
governing throughput for the troop as a whole. 
In fact, whoever is moving the slowest in the troop is the one 
who will govern throughput. And that person may not always be 
Herbie. Before lunch, Herbie was walking faster. It really wasn't 
obvious who was the slowest in the troop. So the role of Herbie— 
the greatest limit on throughput—was actually floating through 
the troop; it depended upon who was moving the slowest at a 
particular time. But overall, Herbie has the least capacity for 
walking. His rate ultimately de termines the troop's rate. Which 
means— 
"Hey, look at this, Mr. Rogo," says Herbie. 
He's pointing at a marker made of concrete next to the trail. 
I take a look. Well, I'll be ... it 's a milestone! A genuine, hon- 
est-to-god milestone! How many  speeches have I heard where 
somebody talks about these damn things? And this is the first one 
I've ever come across. This is what it says: 
<—5—> 
miles 
Hmmm. It must mean there are five miles to walk in both 
directions. So this must be the mi d-point of the hike. Five miles to 
go. 
What time is it? 
I check my watch. Gee, it's 2:30 P.M. a l r e a d y .  A n d  w e  l e f t  a t  
Captured by Plamen T.
121
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement8:30 A.M. So subtracting the hour we took for lunch, that means 
we've covered five miles ... in five hours? 
We aren't moving at two miles per hour. We are moving at 
the rate of one mile per hour. So with five hours to go ... 
It's going to be DARK by the time we get there. 
A n d  H e r b i e  i s  s t a n d i n g  h e r e  n e x t  t o  m e  d e l a y i n g  t h e  
throughput of the entire troop. 
"Okay, let's go! Let's go!" I tell him. 
"All right! All right!" says Herbie, jumping. 
What am I going to do? 
Rogo, (I'm telling myself in my  head), you loser! You can't 
even manage a troop of Boy Scouts! Up front, you've got some 
kid who wants to set a speed r ecord, and here you are stuck 
behind Fat Herbie, the slowest kid in the woods. After an hour, 
the kid in front—if he's really moving at three miles per hour—is 
going to be two miles ahead. Wh ich means you're going to have 
to run two miles to catch up with him. 
I f  t h i s  w e r e  m y  p l a n t ,  P e a c h  w o u l d n ' t  e v e n  g i v e  m e  t h r e e  
months. I'd already be on the str eet by now. The demand was for 
us to cover ten miles in five hours, and we've only done half of 
that. Inventory is racing out of sight. The carrying costs on that 
inventory would be rising. We'd be ruining the company. 
But there really isn't much I can do about Herbie. Maybe I 
could put him someplace else in the line, but he's not going to 
move any faster. So it wouldn't make any difference. 
Or would it? 
"HEY!" I yell forward. "TELL THE KID AT THE FRONT 
TO STOP WHERE HE IS!" 
The boys relay the call up to  the front of the column. 
"EVERYBODY STAY IN LINE UNTIL WE CATCH UP!" I 
yell. "DON'T LOSE YOUR PLACE IN THE LINE!" 
Fifteen minutes later, the tr oop is standing in condensed 
line. I find that Andy is the one who usurped the role of leader. I 
remind them all to stay in exac tly the same place they had when 
we were walking. 
"Okay," I say. "Everybody join hands." 
They all look at each other. 
"Come on! Just do it!" I tell them. "And don't let go." 
Then I take Herbie by the hand and, as if I'm dragging a 
chain, I go up the trail, snakin g past the entire line. Hand in 
hand, the rest of the troop follows. I pass Andy and keep walking. 
Captured by Plamen T.
122
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementAnd when I'm  twice the distance of the line-up, I stop. What I've 
done is turn the entire troop around so that the boys have exactly 
the opposite order they had before. 
"Now listen up!" I say. "This is the order you're going to stay 
in until we reach where we're going. Understood? Nobody passes 
anybody. Everybody just tries to k eep up with the person in front 
of him. Herbie will lead." 
Herbie looks shocked and amazed. "Me?" 
Everyone else looks aghast too. 
"You want him to lead?" asks Andy. 
"But he's the slowest one!" says another kid. 
And I say, "The idea of this hike is not to see who can get 
there the fastest. The idea is to get there together. We're not a 
bunch of individuals out here. We 're a team. And the team does 
not arrive in camp until a ll of us arrive in camp." 
So we start off again. And it works. No kidding. Everybody 
stays together behind Herbie. I've gone to the back of the line so 
I can keep tabs, and I keep waiting for the gaps to appear, but 
they don't. In the middle of th e line I see someone pause to 
adjust his pack straps. But as soon as he starts again, we all walk 
just a little faster and we're caug ht up. Nobody's out of breath. 
What a difference! 
Of course, it isn't long before the fast kids in the back of the 
line start their grumbling. 
"Hey, Herpes!" yells one of them. "I'm going to sleep back 
here. Can't you speed it up a little?" 
"He's doing the best he can," says the kid behind Herbie, "so 
lay off him!" 
"Mr. Rogo, can't we put somebody faster up front?" asks a 
kid ahead of me. 
"Listen, if you guys want to go faster, then you have to figure 
out a way to let Herbie go faster," I tell them. 
It gets quiet for a few minutes. 
Then one of the kids in the rear says, "Hey, Herbie, what 
have you got in your pack?" 
"None of your business!" says Herbie. 
But I say, "Okay, let's hold up for a minute." 
Herbie stops and turns around. I tell him to come to the 
back of the line and take off his pack. As he does, I take the pack 
from him—and nearly drop it.  
Captured by Plamen T.
123
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Herbie, this thing weighs a ton," I say. "What have you got 
in here?" 
"Nothing much," says Herbie. 
I open it up and reach in. Out comes a six-pack of soda. Next 
are some cans of spaghetti. Then come a box of candy bars, a jar 
of pickles, and two cans of tuna fish. Beneath a rain coat and 
rubber boots and a bag of tent stakes, I pull out a large iron 
skillet. And off to the side is an army-surplus collapsible steel 
shovel. 
"Herbie, why did you ever decide  to bring all this along?" I 
ask. 
He looks abashed. "We're supposed to be prepared, you 
know." 
"Okay, let's divide this stuff up," I say. 
"I can carry it!" Herbie insists. 
"Herbie, look, you've done a great job of lugging this stuff so 
far. But we have to make you able  to move faster," I say. "If we 
take some of the load off you, you'll be able to do a better job at 
the front of the line." 
Herbie finally seems to understand. Andy takes the iron skil- 
let, and a few of the others pick up a couple of the items I've 
pulled out of the pack. I take most of it and put it into my own 
pack, because I'm the biggest. Herbie goes back to the head of the 
line. 
Again we start walking. But this time, Herbie can really 
move. Relieved of most of the weight in his pack, it's as if he's 
walking on air. We're flying now, doing twice the speed as a troop 
that we did before. And we still st ay together. Inventory is down. 
Throughput is up. 
Devil's Gulch is lovely in the late afternoon sun. Down in 
what appears to be the gulch, the Rampage River goes creaming 
past boulders and outcroppings of rock. Golden rays of sunlight 
shift through the trees. Birds are tweeting. And off in the distance 
is the unmistakable melody of hi gh-speed automobile traffic. 
"Look!" shouts Andy as he stands atop the promontory, 
"There's a shopping center out there!" 
"Does it have a Burger King?" asks Herbie. 
Dave complains, "Hey, this isn't The Wilderness." 
"They just don't make wildernesses the way they used to," I 
Captured by Plamen T.
124
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementtell him. "Look, we'll have to settle for what we've got. Let's make 
camp." 
The time is now five o'clock. This means that after relieving 
Herbie of his pack, we covered about four miles in two hours. 
Herbie was the key to controlling the entire troop. 
Tents are erected. A spaghetti dinner is prepared by Dave 
and Evan. Feeling somewhat guilty because I set up the rules that 
drove them into their servitude, I give them a hand with cleaning 
up afterwards. 
Dave and I share the same tent that night. We're lying inside 
it, both of us tired. Dave is quiet for a while. Then he speaks up. 
He says, "You know, Dad, I wa s really proud of you today." 
"You were? How come?" 
"The way you figured out what was going on and kept every- 
one together, and put Herbie in  front—we'd probably have been 
on that trail forever if it hadn't been for you," he says. "None of 
the other guys' parents took any responsibility for anything. But 
you did." 
"Thanks," I tell him. "Actually, I learned a lot of things to- 
day." 
"You did?" 
"Yeah, stuff that I think is going to help me straighten out 
the plant," I say. 
"Really? Like what?" 
"Are you sure you want to hear about it?" 
"Sure I am," he claims. 
We're awake for some time talking about everything. He 
hangs in there, even asks some que stions. By the time we're fin- 
ished, all we can hear is some snoring from the other tents, a few 
crickets . . . and the squealing tires of some idiot turning donuts 
out there on the highway.  
Captured by Plamen T.
125
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement16 
Davey and I get home around 4:30 on Sunday afternoon. 
Both of us are tired, but we're f eeling pretty good in spite of the 
miles. After I pull into the driv eway, Dave hops out to open the 
garage door. I ease the Mazda in and go around to open the trunk 
so we can get our packs. 
"I wonder where Mom went," says Dave. 
I look over and notice that her car is gone. 
"She's probably out shopping or something," I tell Dave. 
Inside, Dave stows the camping gear while I go into the bed- 
room to change clothes. A hot shower is going to feel absolutely 
terrific. After I wash off the great outdoors, I'm thinking, maybe 
I'll take everybody out to dinner, get us a good meal as kind of a 
celebration of the triumphant return of father and son. 
A closet door is open in the bedroom. When I reach to shut 
it, I see that most of Julie's cl othes are gone. I stand there for a 
minute looking at the empty spa ce. Dave comes up behind me. 
"Dad?" 
I turn. 
"This was on the kitchen table. I guess Mom left it." 
He hands me a sealed envelope. 
"Thanks Dave." 
I wait until he's gone to open it. Inside is just a short hand- 
written note. It says: 
Al, 
I can't handle always being last in line for you. I need 
more of you and it's clear now that you won't change. 
I'm going away for a while. Need to think things over. 
Sorry to do this to you. I know you're busy. 
Yours truly, 
Julie 
P.S. —I left Sharon with your mother.  
Captured by Plamen T.
126
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementWhen I'm  able to move, I put the note in my pocket and go 
find Davey. I tell him I have to go across town to pick up Sharon, 
and that he's to stay here. If his mother calls, he's to ask her 
where she's calling from and get a number where I can call her 
back. He wants to know if something is wrong. I tell him not to 
worry and promise to explain when I get back. 
I go rocketing to my mother's house. When she opens the 
door, she starts talking about Ju lie before I can even say hello. 
"Alex, do you know your wife did the strangest thing," she 
says. "I was making lunch yesterday when the doorbell rang, and 
when I opened the door Sharon was standing here on the step 
with her little suitcase. And your wife was in the car at the curb 
there, but she wouldn't get out and when I went down to talk to 
her, she drove away." 
By now I'm in the door. Sharon runs to greet me from the 
living room where she is watching television. I pick her up and 
she gives me a long hug. My  mother is still talking. 
"What on earth could be wrong with her?" my mother asks 
me. 
"We'll talk about it later," I tell her. 
"I just don't understand what—" 
"Later, okay?" 
Then I look at Sharon. Her face is rigid. Her eyes are frozen 
big. She's terrified. 
"So . . . did you have a nice vi sit with Grandma?" I ask her. 
She nods but doesn't say anything. 
"What do you say we go home now?" 
She looks down at the floor. 
"Don't you want to go home?" I ask. 
She shrugs her shoulders. 
"Do you like it here with Grand ma?" my smiling mother asks 
her. 
Sharon starts to cry. 
I get Sharon and her suitcase into the car. We start home. 
After I've driven a couple of blocks , I look over at her. She's like a 
little statue sitting there staring straight ahead with her red eyes 
focused on the top of the dashboard. At the next stoplight, I 
reach over for her and pull her next to me. 
She's very quiet for a while, but then she finally looks up at 
me and whispers, "Is Mommy still mad at me?" 
"Mad at you? She isn't mad at you," I tell her.  
Captured by Plamen T.
127
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Yes she is. She wouldn't talk to me." 
"No, no, no, Sharon," I say. "Y our mother isn't upset with 
you. You didn't do anything wrong." 
"Then why?" she asks. 
I say, "Why don't we wait until we get home. I'll explain it to 
both you and your brother then." 
I think that explaining the situat ion to both of the kids at the 
same time turns out to be easier  on me than on them. I've always 
been reasonably adept at maintaining the outward illusion of con- 
trol in the midst of chaos. I tell them Julie has simply gone away 
for a little while, maybe only a day or so. She'll be back. She just 
has to get over a few things that  are upsetting and confusing her. 
I give them all the standard reassurances: your mom still loves 
you; I still love you; there was nothing that either of you could 
have done; everything will work out for the best. For the most 
part, both of them sit there like little rocks. Maybe they're reflect- 
ing back what I'm giving them. 
We go out and get a pizza for dinner. That normally would 
be kind of a fun thing. Tonight,  it's very quiet. Nobody has any- 
thing to say. We mechanica lly chew and then leave. 
When we get back, I make both of the kids do homework for 
school. I don't know if they do it or not. I go to the phone, and 
after a long debate with myself; I try to make a couple of calls. 
Julie doesn't have any friends in Bearington. None that I 
know of. So it would be useless to  try to call the neighbors. They 
wouldn't know anything, and the story about us having problems 
would spread instantly. 
Instead, I try calling Jane, the friend from the last place we 
lived, the one whom Julie claimed to have spent the night with 
last Thursday. There is no answer at Jane's. 
So then I try Julie's parents. I get her father on the phone. 
After some small talk about the weather and the kids, it's clear he 
isn't going to make any declarations. I conclude that her parents 
don't know what's going on. But before I can think of a casual 
way to end the call and avoid the explanations, her old man asks 
me, "So is Julie going to talk to us?" 
"Ah, well, that's actually  why I was calling," I say. 
"Oh? Nothing is wrong I hope," he says. 
"I'm afraid there is," I say. "She left yesterday while I was on 
Captured by Plamen T.
128
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementa camping trip with Dave. I was wondering if you had heard from 
her." 
Immediately he's spreading the alarm to Julie's mother. She 
gets on the phone. 
"Why did she leave?" she asks. 
"I don't know." 
"Well, I know the daughter we raised, and she wouldn't just 
leave without a very good reason," says Julie's mother. 
"She just left me a note saying she had to get away for 
awhile." 
"What did you do to her?" yells her mother. 
"Nothing!" I plead, feeling like a liar in the onslaught. 
Then her father gets back on the phone and asks if I've 
talked to the police. He suggests that maybe she was kidnapped. I 
tell him that's highly unlikely, because my mother saw her drive 
away and nobody had a gun to her head. 
Finally I say, "If you hear from her, would you please have 
her give me a call? I'm very worried about her." 
An hour later, I do call the police. But, as I expected, they 
won't help unless I have some evidence that something criminal 
has taken place. I go and put the kids to bed. 
Sometime after midnight, I'm staring at the dark bedroom 
ceiling and I hear a car turning in to the driveway. I leap out of 
bed and run to the window. By the time I get there, the head- 
lights are arcing back toward the street. It's just a stranger turn- 
ing around. The car drives away.  
Captured by Plamen T.
129
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement17 
Monday morning is a disaster. 
It starts with Davey trying to  make breakfast for himself and 
Sharon and me. Which is a nice, responsible thing to do, but he 
totally screws it up. While I'm in the shower, he attempts pan- 
cakes. I'm midway through shaving when I hear the fight from 
the kitchen. I rush down to fi nd Dave and Sharon pushing each 
other. There is a skillet on the floo r with lumps of batter, black on 
one side and raw on the other, splattered. 
"Hey! What's going on?" I shout. 
"It's all her fault!" yells Dave pointing at his sister. 
"You were burning them!" Sharon says. 
"I was not!" 
Smoke is fuming off the stove where something spilled. I step 
over to shut it off. 
Sharon appeals to me. "I was just trying to help. But he 
wouldn't let me." Then she turns to Dave. "Even / know how to 
make pancakes." 
"Okay, because both of you want  to help, you can help clean 
up," I say. 
When everything is back in some  semblance of order, I feed 
them cold cereal. We eat another meal in silence. 
With all the disruption and delay. Sharon misses her school 
bus. I get Davey out the door, and go looking for her so I can 
drive her to school. She's lying down on her bed. 
"Ready, whenever you are, Miz Rogo." 
"I can't go to school," she says. 
"Why not?" 
"I'm sick." 
"Sharon, you have to go to school," I say. 
"But I'm sick!" she says. 
I go sit down on the edge of the bed. 
"I know you're upset. I am to o," I tell her. "But these are 
facts: I have to go to work. I can't stay home with you, and I won't 
leave you here by yourself. You can go to your grandmother's 
house for the day. Or you can go to school." 
She sits up. I put my  arm around her.  
Captured by Plamen T.
130
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementAfter a minute, she says, "I guess I'll go to school." 
I give her a squeeze and say, "Atta way, kid. I knew you'd do 
the right thing." 
By the time I get both kids to school and myself to work, it's 
past nine o'clock. As I walk in, Fran waves a message slip at me. I 
grab it and read it. It's from Hilton Smyth, marked "urgent" and 
double underlined. 
I call him. 
"Well, it's about time," says Hilton. "I tried to reach you an 
hour ago." 
I roll my eyes. "What's the problem, Hilton?" 
"Your people are sitting on a hundred sub-assemblies I 
need," says Smyth. 
"Hilton, we're not sitting on anything," I say. 
He raises his voice. "Then why aren't they here? I've got a 
customer order we can't ship because your people dropped the 
ball!" 
"Just give me the particulars, and I'll have somebody look 
into it," I tell him. 
He gives some reference numbers and I write them down. 
"Okay, I'll have somebody get back to you." 
"You'd better do more than that, pal," says Hilton. "You'd 
better make sure we get those sub-assemblies by the end of the 
day—and I mean all 100 pi eces, not 87, not 99, but all of them. 
Because I'm not going to have my  people do two setups for final 
assembly on account of your lateness." 
"Look, we'll do our best," I tell him, "but I'm not going to 
make promises." 
"Oh? Well, let's just put it this way," he says. "If we don't get 
100 sub-assemblies from you today, I'm talking to Peach. And 
from what I hear you're in enough trouble with him already." 
"Listen, pal, my status with Bill Peach is none of your damn 
business," I tell him. "What makes you think you can threaten 
me?" 
The pause is so long I think he's going to hang up on me. 
Then he says, "Maybe you ought to read your mail." 
"What do you mean by that?" 
I can hear him smiling. 
"Just get me the sub-assemblies by the end of the day," he 
says sweetly. "Bye-bye."  
Captured by Plamen T.
131
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementI hang up. 
"Weird," I mumble. 
I talk to Fran. She calls Bob Donovan for me and then noti- 
fies the staff that there will be a meeting at ten o'clock. Donovan 
comes in and I ask him to have an expediter see what's holding 
up the job for Smyth's plant. Almost  gritting my teeth as I say it, I 
tell him to make sure the sub-asse mblies go out today. After he's 
gone, I try to forget about the call, but I can't. Finally, I go ask 
Fran if anything has come in recently that mentions Hilton 
Smyth. She thinks for a minute , then reaches for a folder. 
"This memo just came in on Friday," she says. "It looks like 
Mr. Smyth got a promotion." 
I take the memo she hands me. It's from Bill Peach. It's an 
announcement that he's named Smyth to the newly-created posi- 
tion of division productivity manag er. The appointment is effec- 
tive at the end of this week. The job description says that all plant 
managers will now report on a dotted line to Smyth, who will 
"give special attention to manufacturing-productivity improve- 
ment with emphasis on cost reduction." 
And I start to sing, "Oh, what a beautiful morning. .  .  !" 
Whatever enthusiasm I expected  from the staff with regard 
to my education over the weekend . . . well, I don't get it. 
Maybe I thought all I had to do was walk in and open my mouth 
to reveal my discoveries, and they'd all be instantly converted by 
the obvious Tightness. But it do esn't work that way. We—Lou, 
Bob, Stacey, and Ralph Nakamura, who runs data processing for 
the plant—are in the conference room. I'm standing in front next 
to an easel which holds a big pad of paper, sheet after sheet of 
which is covered with little diagrams I've drawn during my expla- 
nations. I've invested a couple of hours in making those explana- 
tions. But now it's almost time for lunch, and they're all just sit- 
ting there unimpressed. 
Looking down the table at the faces looking back at me, I can 
see they don't know what to make of what I've told them. Okay, I 
think I see a faint glimmer of understanding in Stacey's eyes. Bob 
Donovan is on the fence; he seems to have intuitively grasped 
some of it. Ralph is not sure what it is I'm really saying. And Lou 
is frowning at me. One sympathizer, one undecided, one bewil- 
dered, and one skeptic. 
"Okay, what's the problem?" I ask. 
 
Captured by Plamen T.
132
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementThey glance at each other . 
"Come on," I say. "This is lik e I just proved two and two 
equals four and you don't believe me." I look straight at Lou. 
"What's the problem you're having?" 
Lou sits back and shakes his head. "I don't know, Al. It's just 
that . . . well, you said how you figured this out by watching a 
bunch of kids on a hi ke in the woods." 
"So what's wrong with that?" 
"Nothing. But how do you know these things are really go- 
ing on out there in the plant?" 
I flip back a few sheets on the easel until I find the one with 
the names of Jonah's two phenomena written on it. 
"Look at this: do we have statis tical fluctuations in our opera- 
tions?" I ask, pointing to the words. 
"Yes, we do," he says. 
"And do we have dependent events in our plant?" I ask. 
"Yes," he says again. 
"Then what I've told you has to be right," I say. 
"Now hold on a minute," says Bo b. "Robots don't have statis- 
tical fluctuations. They always work at the same pace. That's one 
of the reasons we bought the damn things—consistency. And I 
thought the main reason you went to see this Jonah guy was to 
find out what to do about the robots." 
"It's okay to say that fluctuations in cycle time for a robot 
would be almost flat while it wa s working," I tell him. "But we're 
not dealing just with a robotic operation. Our other operations 
do have both phenomena. And, remember, the goal isn't to make 
the robots productive; it's to make the whole system productive. 
Isn't that right, Lou?" 
"Well, Bob may have a point. We've got a lot of automated 
equipment out there, and the pro cess times ought to be fairly 
consistent," says Lou. 
Stacey turns to him. "But what he's saying—" 
Just then the conference room door opens. Fred, one of our 
expeditors, puts his head into the room and looks at Bob Dono- 
van. 
"May I see you for a second?" he asks Bob. "It's about the job 
for Hilton Smyth." 
Bob stands up to leave the room, but I tell Fred to come in. 
Like it or not, I have to be interested in what's happening on this 
"crisis" for Hilton Smyth. Fred explains that the job has to go 
Captured by Plamen T.
133
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementthrough two more departments before the sub-assemblies are 
complete and ready for shipment. 
"Can we get them out today?" I ask. 
"It's going to be close, but we can try," says Fred. "The truck 
shuttle leaves at five o'clock." 
The shuttle is a private trucking service that all the plants in 
the division use to move parts back and forth. 
"Five o'clock is the last run of the day that we can use to 
reach Smyth's plant," says Bob. "If we don't make that trip, the 
next shuttle won't be until tomorrow afternoon." 
"What has to be done?" I ask. 
"Peter Schnell's department has to do some fabricating. 
Then the pieces have to be welded," says Fred. "We're going to 
set up one of the robots to do the welds." 
"Ah, yes, the robots," I say. "You think we can do it?" 
"According to the quotas, Pete's people are supposed to give 
us the parts for twenty-five units every hour," says Fred. "And I 
know the robot is capable of welding twenty-five units of this sub- 
assembly per hour." 
Bob asks about moving the pieces to the robot. In a normal 
situation, the pieces finished by  Pete's people probably would be 
moved to the robot only once a day,  or maybe not until the entire 
batch was finished. We can't wait  that long. The robot has to 
begin its work as soon as possible. 
"I'll make arrangements to have a materials handler stop at 
Pete's department every hour on the hour," says Fred. 
"Okay," says Bob. "How soon can Pete start?" 
Fred says, "Pete can start on the job at noon, so we've got five 
hours." 
"You know that Pete's peopl e quit at four," says Bob. 
"Yeah, I told you it's going to be close," says Fred. "But all 
we can do is try. That's what you want, isn't it?" 
This gives me an idea. I talk to the staff. "You people don't 
r e a l l y  k n o w  w h a t  t o  m a k e  o f  w h a t  I told you this morning. But if 
what I've told you is correct, then we should be able to see the 
effects occurring out there on the floor. Am I right?" 
The heads nod. 
"And if we know that Jonah is correct, we'd be pretty stupid 
to continue running the plant the same way as before—right? So 
I'm going to let you see for yourse lves what's happening. You say 
Pete's going to start on this at noon?" 
"Right," says Fred. "Everyone in that department is at lunch 
Captured by Plamen T.
134
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementnow. They went at eleven-thirty. So they'll start at twelve. And the 
robot will be set up by one o'clock, when the materials handler 
will make the first transfer." 
I take some paper and a pencil and start sketching a simple 
schedule. 
"The output has to be one hundred pieces by five o'clock— 
no less than that. Hilton says he won't accept a partial shipment. 
So if we can't do the whole job, then I don't want us to ship 
anything," I say. "Now Pete's pe ople are supposed to produce at 
the rate of twenty-five pieces per hour. But that doesn't mean 
they'll always have twenty-five at the end of every hour. Some- 
times they'll be a few pieces s hort, sometimes they'll be a few 
ahead." 
I look around; everyone is with me. 
"So we've got statistical fluctu ations going on," I say. "But 
we're planning that from noon unt il four o'clock, Pete's depart- 
ment should have averaged an output of one hundred pieces. 
The robot, on the other hand, is supposed to be more precise in 
its output. It will be set up to work at the rate of twenty-five pieces 
per hour—no more, no less. We also  have dependent events, be- 
cause the robot cannot begin its welding until the materials han- 
dler has delivered the pieces from Pete's department." 
"The robot can't start until one o'clock," I say, "but by five 
o'clock when the truck is ready to  leave, we want to be loading 
the last piece into the back. So, ex pressed in a diagram, this is 
what is supposed to happen . . ." 
I show them the finished schedule, which looks like this: 
 
Captured by Plamen T.
135
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Okay, I want Pete to keep a log of exactly how many parts 
are actually completed by his department hour by hour," I say . 
"And I want Fred to keep the same type of log for the robot . And 
remember: no cheating. We need  the real numbers. Okay?" 
"Sure, no problem," says Fred. 
"By the way, do you actually think we'll be able to ship one 
hundred pieces today?" I ask. 
" I  g u e s s  i t ' s  u p  t o  P e t e , "  s a y s  B o b .  " I f  h e  s a y s  h e  c a n  d o  i t ,  I  
don't see why not." 
"Tell you what," I say to Bob. "I'll bet you ten bucks we don't 
ship today." 
"You serious?" asks Bob. 
"Sure I am." 
"Okay, you're on," says Bob. "Ten bucks." 
While everyone else is at lunch, I call Hilton Smyth. Hilton is 
at lunch as well, but I leave a message for him. I tell his secretary 
the sub-assemblies will definitely a rrive at his plant tomorrow, but 
that's the best we can do—unless Hilton wants to pay for a special 
shipment tonight. (Knowing his concern for holding down costs, 
I'm sure Hilton won't want to  shell out anything extra.) 
After that call, I sit back and try to think about my marriage 
and what to do. Obviously, there has been no news from Julie. 
I'm mad as hell that she took of f—I'm also very worried about 
her. But what can I do? I can't cr uise the streets looking for her. 
She could be anywhere; I just hav e to be patient. Eventually I 
should hear from her. Or her lawyer. Meanwhile, there are two 
kids who have to be taken care o f. Well, for all practical purposes, 
we'd better make that three kids. 
Fran comes into my office with another message slip. She 
says, "One of the other secretaries just gave me this as I got back 
from lunch. While you were on the phone, you got a call from 
David Rogo. Is that your son?" 
"Yes, what's the problem?" 
"It says, he's worried he won't be able to get into the house 
after school," she says. "Is your wife gone?" 
"Yeah, she's out of town for a few days," I tell her. "Fran, 
you've got a couple of kids. How do you manage to hold a job 
and take care of them?" 
She laughs. "Well, 'tain't easy. On the other hand, I don't 
work the long hours you do. If I were you, I'd get some help until 
she gets back."  
Captured by Plamen T.
136
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementWhen she leaves, I pick up the phone again. 
"Hello, Mom? It's Alex." 
"Have you heard from Julie yet?" she asks. 
"No, I haven't," I say. "Liste n, Mom, would you mind stay- 
ing with me and the kids until Julie gets back?" 
At two o'clock I slip out to pi ck up my mother and take her 
to the house before the kids get home from school. When I arrive 
at her house, she's at the door with two suitcases and four card- 
board boxes filled with half of her kitchen. 
"Mom, we've already got pots and pans at my house," I tell 
her. 
"They're just not the same as mine," she says. 
So we load the trunk. I take her and her pots and pans over 
to the house and unload. She wait s for the kids to come home 
from school, and I race back to the plant. 
Around four o'clock, at the end of first shift, I go down to 
Bob Donovan's office to find ou t what the story is on Smyth's 
shipment. He's waiting for me. 
"Well, well, well. Good aftern oon!" says Bob as I open the 
door and walk in. "How nice of you to drop by!" 
"What are you so happy about?" I ask him. 
"I'm always happy when people who owe me money drop 
by," says Bob. 
"Oh, is that right?" I ask him. "What makes you think any- 
body owes you money?" 
Bob holds out his hand and wiggles his fingers. "Come on! 
Don't tell me you forgot about the bet we made! Ten bucks, re- 
member? I just talked to Pete an d his people are indeed going to 
finish the hundred units of parts. So the robot should have no 
problem finishing that shipment for Smyth's plant." 
"Yeah? Well, if that's true I won't mind losing," I tell him. 
"So you concede defeat?" 
"No way. Not until those sub-assemblies get on the five 
o'clock truck," I tell him. 
"Suit yourself," says Bob. 
"Let's go see what's really going on out there," I say. 
We take a walk out on the floor to  P e t e ' s  o f f i c e .  B e f o r e  w e  g e t  
there, we pass the robot, who's br ightening the area with its weld 
Captured by Plamen T.
137
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementflashes. Coming the other way are two guys. Just as they pass the 
welding area, they stop and give a little cheer. 
"We beat the robot! We be at the robot!" they say. 
"Must be from Pete's department," says Bob. 
We smile as we pass them. They didn't really beat anything, 
of course, but what the hell. They look happy. Bob and I con- 
tinue on to Pete's office, which is  a little steel-sided shack among 
the machines. 
"Hello there," says Pete as we walk in. "We got that rush job 
done for you today." 
"Good, Pete. But do you have that log sheet you were sup- 
posed to keep," I ask him. 
"Yes, I do," says Pete. "Now where did I put it?" 
He sorts through the papers on his desk, talking as he hunts 
for it. 
"You should have seen my pe ople this afternoon. I mean, 
they really moved. I went around and told them how important 
this shipment is, and they really put themselves into it. You know 
how things usually slow down a li ttle at the end of a shift. But 
today they hustled. They were proud when they walked out of 
here today." 
"Yeah, we noticed," says Bob. 
He puts the log sheet down on top of a table in front of us. 
"There you are," he says. 
We read it. 
 
Captured by Plamen T.
138
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Okay, so you only got ninete en pieces done in the first 
hour," I say . 
"Well, it took us a little longer  to get organized, and one guy 
was late coming back from lunch," says Pete. "But at one o'clock 
we had a materials handler take th e nineteen over to the robot so 
it could get started." 
"Then from one to two, you still missed the quota by four 
pieces," says Bob. 
"Yeah, but so what?" says Pe te. "Look what happened from 
two o'clock to three: we beat the quota by three pieces. Then 
when I saw we were still behind, I went around and told every- 
one how important it was for us to get those hundred pieces done 
by the end of the shift." 
"So everyone went a little faster," I say. 
"That's right," says Pete. "And we made up for the slow 
start." 
"Yeah, thirty-two pieces in the last hour," says Bob. "So what 
do you say, Al?" 
"Let's go see what's happening with the robot," I say. 
At five minutes past five o'cloc k, the robot is still turning out 
welded sub-assemblies. Donovan is pacing. Fred walks up. 
"Is that truck going to wait?" asks Bob. 
"I asked the driver, and he says he can't. He's got other stops 
to make and if he waits for us, he 'll be late all night," says Fred. 
Bob turns to the machine. "Well, what the heck is wrong with 
this stupid robot? It's go t all the parts it needs." 
I tap him on the shoulder. 
"Here," I say. "Look at this." 
I show him the sheet of paper on which Fred has been re- 
cording the output of the robot. From my shirt pocket, I take out 
Pete's log and fold the bottom of it  so we can put the two pieces of 
paper together. 
Combined, the two of them look like this: 
I tell him, "You see, the first hour Pete's people did nineteen 
pieces. The robot was capable of do ing twenty-five, but Pete deliv- 
ered less than that, so nineteen became the robot's true capacity 
for that hour." 
"Same with the second hour," says Fred. "Pete delivered 
twenty-one, the robot could only do twenty-one." 
Captured by Plamen T.
139
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementOutput = 90 pcs. 
"Every time Pete's area got behind, it was passed on to the 
robot," I say. "But when Pete delivered 28 pieces, the robot could 
still only do twenty-five. That me ant that when the final delivery 
of thirty-two pieces arrived at four o'clock, the robot still had 
three pieces to work on from the last batch. So it couldn't start on 
the final batch right away." 
"Okay, I see now," says Bob. 
Fred says, "You know, the most Pete was ever behind was ten 
pieces. Kind of funny how that's exactly the number of pieces we 
ended up short." 
"That's the effect of the mathematical principle I was trying 
to explain this morning," I say.  "The maximum deviation of a 
preceding operation will become the starting point of a subse- 
quent operation." 
Bob reaches for his wallet. 
"Well, I guess I owe you ten bucks," he says to me. 
"Tell you what," I say. "Inste ad of paying me, why don't you 
give the money to Pete so he can spring for a round of coffee or 
something for the people in his department—just a little way to 
say thanks for the extra effort this afternoon." 
 
Captured by Plamen T.
140
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Yeah, right, that's a good idea," says Bob. "Listen, sorry we 
couldn't ship today. Hope it  doesn't get us in trouble." 
"We can't worry about it now," I tell him. "The gain we 
made today is that we learned something. But I'll tell you one 
thing: we've got to take a clos e look at our incentives here." 
"How come?" asks Bob. 
"Don't you see? It didn't matter that Pete got his hundred 
pieces done, because we still couldn't ship," I say. "But Pete and 
his people thought they were heroes. Ordinarily, we might have 
thought the same thing. That isn't right."  
Captured by Plamen T.
141
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement18 
When I get home that evening, both of the kids greet me at 
the door. My mother is in the background, with steam pouring 
out of the kitchen. I presume it has something to do with dinner 
and that she has everything under control. In front of me, 
Sharon's face is beaming up at me. 
"Guess what!" she says. 
"I give up," I say. 
"Mommy called on the phone," Sharon says. 
"She did!" I say. 
I glance up at my mother. She shakes her head. 
"Davey answered the phone," she says. "I didn't talk to her." 
I look down at Sharon. "So what did Mommy say?" 
"She said she loved Dav ey and me," says Sharon. 
"And she said she would be away for a while," adds Davey. 
"But that we shouldn't worry about her." 
"Did she say when she would be coming back?" I ask. 
"I asked her that," says Davey. "But she said she couldn't say 
right now." 
"Did you get a phone number so  I can call her back?" I ask 
him. 
He looks down at the floor. 
"David! You were supposed to ask her for the number if she 
called!" 
He mumbles, "I did, but . . . she didn't want to give it to 
me." 
"Oh," I say. 
"Sorry, Dad." 
"It's okay, Dave. Thanks for trying." 
"Why don't we all sit down to dinner," my mother says 
cheerily. 
This time the meal is not silent. My mother talks, and she 
does her best to cheer us up. She tells us stories about the Depres- 
sion and how lucky we are to have food to eat. 
Tuesday morning is a little bit more normal. Joining efforts, 
my mother and I manage to get the kids to school and me to 
Captured by Plamen T.
142
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementwork on time. By 8:30, Bob, Stacey, Lou, and Ralph are in my 
office, and we're talking about what happened yesterday. Today, 
I find them much more attentive. Maybe it's because they've seen 
the proof of the idea take place on their own turf, so to speak. 
"This combination of dependency and fluctuations is what 
we're up against every day," I tell them. "I think it explains why 
we have so many late orders." 
Lou and Ralph are examining the two charts we made yes- 
terday. "What would have happened if the second operation 
hadn't been a robot, if it had been some kind of job with people?" 
asks Lou. 
"We would have had another set of statistical fluctuations to 
complicate things," I say. "Don't forget we only had two opera- 
tions here. You can imagine what happens when we've got de- 
pendency running through ten or fifteen operations, each with 
its own set of fluctuations, just to  make one part. And some of our 
products involve hundreds of parts." 
Stacey is troubled. She asks, "T hen how can we ever control 
what's going on out there?" 
I say, "That's the billion-dollar question: how can we control 
the fifty-thousand or—who knows? —maybe it's fifty-million vari- 
ables which exist in this plant?" 
"We'd have to buy a new super computer just to keep track 
of all of them," says Ralph. 
I say, "A new computer wouldn't save us. Data management 
alone isn't going to give us more control." 
"What about longer lead times?" asks Bob. 
"Oh, you really think longer lead time would have guaran- 
teed our ability to ship that orde r to Hilton Smyth's plant?" I ask 
him. "How long had we already known about that order before 
yesterday, Bob?" 
Bob wiggles back and forth. "Hey, all I'm saying is that we'd 
have some slop in there to make up for the delays." 
Then Stacey says, "Longer lead times increase inventory, 
Bob. And that isn't the goal." 
"Okay, I know that," Bob is saying. "I'm not fighting you. 
The only reason I mention the lead times is I want to know what 
we do about all this." 
Everybody turns to me. 
I say, "This much is clear to me. We have to change the way 
we think about production capacity. We cannot measure the ca- 
Captured by Plamen T.
143
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementpacity of a resource in isolation. Its true productive capacity de- 
pends upon where it is in the plan t. And trying to level capacity 
with demand to minimize expenses  has really screwed us up. We 
shouldn't be trying to  do that at all." 
"But that's what everybod y else does," says Bob. 
"Yes, everybody does. Or claims to. As we now can see, it's a 
stupid thing to try," I say. 
"So how do other manufacturers survive?" asks Lou. 
I tell him I was wondering that myself. What I suspect is that 
as a plant comes close to being balanced through the efforts of 
engineers and managers doing the wrong things, events head 
toward a crisis and the plant is very quickly un balanced by shift- 
ing workers or by overtime or by  calling back some people from 
layoff. The survival incentive overrides false beliefs. 
"Okay, but again, what are we going to do?" asks Bob. "We 
can't hire without division approv al. And we've even got a policy 
against overtime." 
"Maybe it's time to call Jonah again," says Stacey. 
And I say, "I think maybe you're right." 
It takes Fran half an hour to lo cate the area of the world 
where Jonah happens to be today, and another hour passes be- 
fore Jonah can get to the phone to talk to us. As soon as he's on 
the line, I have another secretary round up the staff again and 
corral them in my office so we can hear him on a speaker phone. 
While they're coming in, I tell Jonah about the hike with Herbie 
where I discovered the meaning of what he was telling me, and 
what we've learned about the effects of the two phenomena in the 
plant. 
"What we know now," I tell him,  "is that we shouldn't be 
looking at each local area and trying to trim it. We should be 
trying to optimize the whole system. Some resources have to have 
more capacity than others. The ones at the end of the line should 
have more than the ones at the beginning—sometimes a lot 
more. Am I right?" 
"You're on the money," says Jonah. 
"Good. Glad to hear we're getting somewhere," I say. "Only 
the reason I called is, we need to know where to go from here." 
He says, "What you have to do next, Alex, is distinguish 
between two types of resources in your plant. One type is what I 
call a bottleneck resource. The other is, very simply, a non-bottle- 
neck resource." 
Captured by Plamen T.
144
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement I whisper to everybody to star t taking some notes on this. 
"A bottleneck," Jonah continue s, "is any resource whose ca- 
pacity is equal to or less than the demand placed upon it. And a 
non-bottleneck is any resource whose capacity is greater than the 
demand placed on it. Got that?" 
"Right," I tell him. 
"Once you have recognized these two types of resources," 
says Jonah, "you will begin to see vast implications." 
"But, Jonah, where does market  demand come in?" Stacey 
asks. "There has to be some relationship between demand and 
capacity." 
He says, "Yes, but as you alre ady know, you should not bal- 
ance capacity with demand. What you need to do instead is bal- 
ance the flow of product through the plant with demand from the 
market. This, in fact, is the first of nine rules that express the 
relationships between bottlenecks and non-bottlenecks and how 
y o u  s h o u l d  m a n a g e  y o u r  p l a n t .  S o  l e t  m e  r e p e a t  i t  f o r  y o u :  B a l -  
ance flow, not capacity." 
Stacey is still puzzled. She says, "I'm not sure I understand. 
Where do the bottlenecks and non- bottlenecks come into the pic- 
ture?" 
Jonah says, "Let me ask you: which of the two types of re- 
sources determines the effect ive capacity of the plant?" 
"It would have to be th e bottleneck," she says. 
I say, "That's right. It's like the kid on that hike last weekend 
—Herbie. He had the least capa city and he was the one who 
actually determined how fast th e troop as a whole could move." 
"So where should you balance the floor?" asks Jonah. 
"Oh, I see," says Stacey. "The  idea is to make the flow 
through the bottleneck equal to demand from the market." 
"Basically, yes, you've got it," says Jonah. "Actually, the flow 
should be a tiny bit less than the demand." 
"   "How come?" asks Lou. 
"Because if you keep it equal to demand and the market 
demand goes down, you'll lose money," says Jonah. "But that's a 
fine point. Speaking fundamentally, the bottleneck flow should 
be on a par with demand." 
Bob Donovan is now making va rious noises, trying to get 
into the conversation. 
"Excuse me, but I thought bottlenecks were bad," says Bob. 
"They ought to be eliminated  where possible, right?"  
Captured by Plamen T.
145
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"No, bottlenecks are not necessarily bad—or good," says Jo- 
nah, "they are simply a reality. What I am suggesting is that 
where they exist, you must then use them to control the flow 
through the system an d into the market." 
That makes sense to me as I' m listening, because I'm remem- 
bering how I used Herbie to control the troop during the hike. 
"Now I have to run," says Jonah, "because you caught me 
during a ten-minute break in a presentation." 
I jump in. "Jonah, before you go—!" 
"Yes?" 
"What's our next step?" 
He says, "Well, first of all, do es your plant have any bottle- 
necks?" 
"We don't know," I tell him. 
"Then that's your next step," he says. "You have to find this 
out, because it makes an enormous difference in how you manage 
your resources." 
"How do we find the bot tlenecks?" says Stacey. 
"It's very simple, but it would take a few minutes to explain. 
Look, try to figure that out for yo urselves," says Jonah. "It's re- 
ally easy to do if you think about it first." 
I say, "Okay, but. . . ." 
"Good-bye for now," he says. "Call me when you know if you 
have a bottleneck." 
The speaker phone issues a click, followed by a fuzzy hum. 
"Well . . . what now?" asks Lou. 
"I guess we look at all our re sources," I say, "and compare 
them against market demand. If we find one in which demand is 
greater than capacity, then we' ll know we've got a bottleneck." 
"What happens if we fi nd one?" asks Stacey. 
"I guess the best thing to do wo uld be what I did to the scout 
troop," I say. "We adjust capacity so the bottleneck is at the front 
of production." 
"My question," Lou says, "is what happens if our resource 
with the least capacity in fact has a capacity greater than what 
market demand calls for?" 
"Then I guess we'd have something like a bottle without a 
neck," I say. 
"But there would still be limits," says Stacey. "The bottle 
would still have walls. But they'd be greater than the market de- 
mand." 
Captured by Plamen T.
146
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"And if that's the case?" asks Lou. 
"I don't know," I tell him. "I guess the first thing to do is 
find out if we've got a bottleneck." 
"So we go look for Herbie," sa ys Ralph. "If he's out there." 
"Yeah, quick, before we talk ou rselves to death," says Bob. 
I walk into the conference room a few days later and there's 
paper everywhere. The main tabl e is covered with computer 
print-outs and binders. Over in the corner, a data terminal has 
been installed; next to it, a pr inter is churning out even more 
paper. The wastebaskets are full. So are all the ashtrays. The litter 
of white styrofoam coffee cups, empty sugar packets and creamer 
containers, napkins, candy bar and cracker wrappers, and so on 
is scattered about. What has happened is the place has been 
turned into our headquarters in the search for Herbie. We have 
not found him yet. And we're getting tired. 
Sitting at the far end of the main table is Ralph Nakamura. 
He and his data processing people, and the system data base they 
manage, are essential to the search. 
Ralph does not look happy as I come in. He's running his 
skinny fingers through his thinning black hair. 
"This isn't the way it's supposed to be," he's saying to Stacey 
and Bob. 
"Ahh, perfect timing," says Ralph when he sees me. "Do you 
know what we just did?" 
"You found Herbie?" I say. 
Ralph says, "No, we just spent two and a half hours calculat- 
ing the demand for machines that don't exist." 
"Why'd you do that?" 
Ralph starts to sputter. Then Bob stops him. 
"Wait, wait, wait a minute. Let me explain," says Bob. "What 
happened was they came across some routings which still listed 
some of the old milling machines as  being part of the processing. 
We don't use them—" 
"Not only don't we use them, just found out we sold them a 
year ago," says Ralph. 
"Everybody down in that department knows those machines 
aren't there anymore, so it's ne ver been a problem," says Bob. 
So it goes. We're trying to calculate demand for every re- 
source, every piece of equipment, in the plant. Jonah had said a 
bottleneck is any resource which is equal to or less than the mar- 
Captured by Plamen T.
147
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementket demand placed on it. To find out if we've got one then, we 
concluded we first would have to know the total market demand 
for products coming out of this plant. And, second, we would 
have to find out how much time each resource has to contribute 
toward filling the demand. If the number of available hours for 
production (discounting maintenance time for machines, lunch 
and breaks for people, and so on) for the resource is equal to or 
less than the hours demanded, then we know we've found our 
Herbie. 
Getting a fix on the total market demand is a matter of pull- 
ing together data which we have on hand anyway—the existing 
backlog of customer orders, and the forecast for new product and 
spare parts. It's the complete product mix for the entire plant, 
including what we "sell" to other plants and divisions in the com- 
pany. 
Having done that, we're now in the process of calculating the 
hours each "work center" has to  contribute. We're defining a 
work center as any group of the same resources. Ten welders with 
the same skills constitute a work center. Four identical machines 
constitute another. The four machinists who set up and run the 
machines are still another, and so on. Dividing the total of work 
center hours needed, by the number of resources in it, gives us 
the relative effort per resource, a standard we can use for com- 
parison. 
Yesterday, for instance, we fo und the demand for injection 
molding machines is about 260 hours a month for all the injec- 
tion molded parts that they have to process. The available time 
for those machines is about 280 hours per month, per resource. 
So that means we still have reserv e capacity on those machines. 
But the more we get into this, the more we're finding that 
the accuracy of our data is less than perfect. We're coming up 
with bills of material that don't match the routings, routings that 
don't have the current run-times—or  the correct machines, as we 
just found out—and so on. 
"The problem is, we've been un der the gun so much that a 
lot of the updating has just fallen by the wayside," says Stacey. 
"Hell, with engineering change s, shifting labor around, and 
all that happening all the time, it 's just plain tough to keep up 
with it no matter what," says Bob. 
Ralph shakes his head. "To double-check and update every 
piece of data relevant to this  plant could take months!" 
Captured by Plamen T.
148
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Or years," mumbles Bob. 
I sit down and close my eyes for a second. When I open my 
eyes, they're all looking at me. 
"Obviously, we're not g°ing to have time for that," I say. 
"We've only got ten weeks now to  make something happen be- 
fore Peach blows the whistle. I know we're on the right track, but 
we're still just limping along here. We've got to accept the fact 
we're not going to have perfect data to work with." 
Ralph says, "Then I have to remind you of the old data 
processing aphorism: Garbage in, garbage out." 
"Wait a minute," I say. "Maybe we're being a little too 
methodical. Searching a data base isn't the only way to find an- 
swers. Can't we come up with some other faster way to isolate the 
bottleneck—or at least identify the candidates? When I think 
back to the model of the boys on the hike, it was obvious who the 
slower kids were on the trail. Doesn't anybody have any hunches 
where the Herbie might be in the plant?" 
"But we don't even know if we 've got one yet," says Stacey. 
Bob has his hands on his hips. His mouth is half open as if he 
might say something. Finally, he does. 
"Hell, I've been at this plan t for more than twenty years. 
After that much time, I know where the problems usually seem to 
start," he says. "I think I could put together a list of areas where 
we might be short on capacity; at least that would narrow the 
focus for us. It migh t save some time." 
Stacey turns to him. "You know, you just gave me an idea. If 
we talk to the expediters. They could probably tell us which parts 
they're missing most of the time, and in which departments they 
usually go to look for'them." 
"What good is that going to do?" asks Ralph. 
"The parts most frequently in short supply are probably the 
ones that would pass through a bottleneck," she says. "And the 
department where the expeditors go  to look for them is probably 
where we'll find our Herbie." 
I sit up in my seat. "Yeah, that makes a lot of sense." 
I stand up and start to pace. 
"And I'll tell you something 7 just thought of," I say. "Out on 
the trail, you could tell the slower  kids by the gaps in the line. 
The slower the kid, the greater the distance between him and the 
kid in front of him. In terms of  the analogy, those gaps were 
inventory." 
Captured by Plamen T.
149
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementBob, Ralph, and Stacey stare at me. 
"Don't you see?" I ask them. "If we've got a Herbie, it's 
probably going to have a huge pile  of work-in-process sitting in 
front of it." 
"Yeah, but we got huge piles all over the place out there," 
says Bob. 
"Then we find the biggest one," I say. 
"Right! That's got to be anot her sure sign," says Stacey. 
I turn and ask, "What do you think, Ralph?" 
"Well, it all sounds worth a tr y," says Ralph. "Once you've 
narrowed the field to maybe three of four work centers, it won't 
take long for us to check your findings against the historical data 
just to be sure." 
Bob looks at Ralph and says in a kidding voice, "Yeah, well, 
we've all seen how good that is." 
But Ralph doesn't take it in a kidding way. He looks embar- 
rassed. 
"Hey, I can only work with what I've got," he says. "What do 
you want me to do?" 
"Okay, the important thing is that we have new methods to 
try," I say. "Let's not waste time pinning the blame on bad data. 
Let's get to work." 
Fueled by the energy of new ideas, we go to work, and the 
search goes quickly ... so quickly,  i n  f a c t ,  t h a t  w h a t  w e  d i s c o v e r  
makes me feel as though we've ru n ourselves straight into a wall. 
"This is it. Hello, Herbie," says Bob. 
In front of us is the NCX-10. 
"Are you sure this is a bottleneck?" I ask. 
"There's some of the proof," he  s a y s  a s  h e  p o i n t s  t o  t h e  
stacks of work-in-process invent ory nearby—weeks of backlog ac- 
cording to the report Ralph and Stacey put together and which 
we reviewed about an hour ago. 
"We talked to the expeditors," says Bob. "They say we're 
always waiting for parts from th is machine. Supervisors say the 
same. And the guy who runs this area got himself a set of ear- 
plugs to keep him from going deaf from all the bitching he gets 
from everyone." 
"But this is supposed to be one of our most efficient pieces of 
equipment," I say.  
Captured by Plamen T.
150
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"It is," says Bob. "It's the lowest-cost, highest-rate means we 
have of producing these particular parts." 
"So why is this a bottleneck?" 
"This is the only one like it we've got," he says. 
"Yes, I know that," I say, and I stare at him until he explains. 
"See, this machine here is only about two years old. Before 
we installed it, we used other machines to do what it does. But 
this machine can do all the opera tions that used to take three 
different machines," says Bob. 
He tells me about how they used  to process these parts using 
the three separate types of machines. In one typical instance, the 
process times per part were something like two minutes on the 
first machine, eight minutes on the second, and four minutes on 
the third—a grand total of fourteen minutes per part. But the 
new NCX-10 machine can do all three processes in ten minutes 
per part. 
I say, "You're telling me we're saving four minutes per part. 
Doesn't that mean we're producing more parts per hour than we 
were? How come we've got so much inventory stacked up for this 
thing?" 
"With the old way, we had more machines," he says. "We 
had two of the first type, five of the second type, and three of the 
third type." 
I nod, understanding now. "So you could do more parts, 
en though it took you longer per part. Then why did we buy 
e NCX-10?" 
"Each of the other machines had  to have a machinist to run 
Bob says. "The NCX-10 only needs two guys on it for setups. 
,e I said, it's the lowest cost way for us to produce these parts." 
I take a slow walk all th e way around the machine. 
"We do run this thing three sh ifts, don't we?" I ask Bob. 
"Well, we just started to again.  It took a while to find a re- 
placement for Tony, the setup guy on third shift who quit." 
"Oh, yeah ..." I say. Man, Peach really did it to us that day. 
I ask, "Bob, how long does it ta ke to train new people on this 
machine?" 
"About six months," he says. 
I shake my head. 
"That's a big part of the probl em, Al. We train somebody and 
after a couple of years they can go elsewhere and make a few 
Captured by Plamen T.
151
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementdollars more with somebody else," says Bob. "And we can't seem 
to attract anybody good with the wages we offer." 
"Well why don't we pay more for people on this equipment?" 
"The union," says Bob. "We'd get complaints, and the union 
would want us to up the pay-gr ade for all the setup people." 
I take a last look. 
"Okay, so much fo r this," I say. 
But that isn't all. The two of us walk to the other side of the 
plant where Bob gives me a second introduction. 
"Meet Herbie Number Two: the heat-treat department," says 
Bob. 
This one looks more like what you might think of in terms of 
an industrial Herbie. It's dirty. It's hot. It's ugly. It's dull. And it's 
indispensable. 
Heat-treat basically is a pair of furnaces ... a couple of 
grimy, dingy, steel boxes, the insides of which are lined with ce- 
ramic blocks. Gas burners raise the internal temperatures to the 
1500-degree-Fahrenheit range. 
Certain parts, after they've b een machined or cold-worked 
or whatever at ordinary temperat ures, can't be worked on any- 
more until they've been treated wi th heat for an extended period 
of time. Most often, we need to  soften the metal, which becomes 
very hard and brittle during processing, so it can have more 
machining done to it. 
So the furnace operators put in  the parts, from a dozen or 
less to a couple of hundred, then they fire up the thing and cook 
the parts in there for a long time—anywhere from six hours to 
sixteen hours. And afterwards, the parts always have to go 
through a further cool-down to air temperature outside the fur- 
nace. We lose a lot of time on this process. 
"What's the problem here—we need  bigger furnaces?" I ask. 
Bob says, "Well . . . yes and no. Most of the time these fur- 
naces are running half empty." 
"How come?" 
"It's the expediters who seem to cause the problem," he says. 
"They're always running over here and having us run five of this 
part or a dozen of that part just so they can have enough to 
assemble a shipment. So we end up having fifty parts wait while 
we heat-treat a handful. I mean, this operation is run like a bar- 
bershop—take a number and stand in line." 
"So we're not running full batches."  
Captured by Plamen T.
152
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Yeah, sometimes we are. But sometimes even if we do a full 
batch in number, it's not enough to fill the furnace." 
"The batches are too small?" 
"Or too big in size, and we ha ve to run a second heat to 
handle the pieces that wouldn't fit in the first. It just never seems 
to work out," says Bob. "You know, a couple of years ago, there 
was a proposal to add a third furnace, on account of the prob- 
lems." 
"What happened to it?" 
"It was killed at the division level. They wouldn't authorize 
the funds because of low efficien cies. They told us to use the 
capacity we've got. Then maybe they'd talk expansion. Besides, 
there was all kinds of noise about how we've got to save energy 
and how another furnace would burn twice as much fuel and all 
that." 
"Okay, but if we filled the furnace every time, would we have 
enough capacity to meet demand?" I ask. 
Bob laughs. 
"I don't know. We've never done it that way before." 
Once upon a time, I had an idea for doing to the plant essen- 
tially what I did with the boys on the hike. I thought the best 
thing to do would be to reorganize everything so the resource 
with the least capacity would be first in the routings. All other 
resources would have gradual increases in capacity to make up 
for the statistical fluctuations  passed on through dependency. 
Well, the staff and I meet right after Bob and I get back to 
the office, and it's pretty obvious, awfully damn quick, that my 
grand plan for the perfect un balanced plant with Herbie in front 
is just not going to fly. 
"From a production standpoint, we  can't do it," says Stacey. 
"There is just no way we can move even one Herbie—let 
alone two—to the front of prod uction," Bob says. "The sequence 
of operations has to stay the way it is. There's nothing we can do 
about it." 
"Okay, I already can see that," I say. 
"We're stuck with a set of de pendent events," says Lou. 
As I listen to them, I get that old familiar feeling which 
j anes whenever a lot of work and energy are about to go down 
the tubes. It's kind of lik e watching a tire go flat. 
I say, "Okay, if we can't do an ything to change their position 
Captured by Plamen T.
153
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementin the sequence, then maybe we can increase their capacities. 
We'll make them into non-bottlenecks." 
Stacey asks, "But what about the step-up in capacity from 
beginning to end?" 
"We'll reorganize . . . we'll decr ease capacity at the head of 
production and increase it each stage on through," I suggest. 
"Al, we're not just talking about moving people around. How 
can we add capacity without addi ng equipment?" asks Bob. "And 
if we're talking about equipment,  we're getting ourselves into 
some major capital. A second furnace on heat-treat, and possibly 
a second n/c machine . . . brothe r, you're talking megabucks." 
"The bottom line," says Lou, "is that we don't have the 
money. If we think we can go to Peach and ask him for excess 
capacity for a plant that currently  isn't making money in the mid- 
dle of one of the worst years in the company's history . . . well, 
excuse my French, but we're out of our goddamned minds." 
Captured by Plamen T.
154
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement19 
My mother and the kids and I are having dinner that eve- 
ning when Mom says to me, "Aren't you going to eat your peas, 
Alex?" 
I tell her, "Mom, I'm an adult now. It's my option whether 
or not to eat my peas." 
She looks hurt. 
I say, "Sorry. I'm a little depressed tonight." 
"What's wrong, Dad?" asks Davey. 
"Well . . . it's kind of complicated," I say. "Let's just finish 
dinner. I've got to leave for the airport in a few minutes." 
"Are you going away?" asks Sharon. 
"No, I'm just going to pick up somebody," I say. 
"Is it Mommy?" asks Sharon. 
"No, not Mommy. I wish it could be." 
"Alex, tell your children what 's bothering you," says my 
mother. "It affects them, too." 
I look at the kids and realize my mother's right. I say, "We 
found out we've got some problem s at the plant which we might 
not be able to solve." 
"What about the man you called?" she asks. "Can't you talk 
to him?" 
"You mean Jonah? That's who I'm picking up at the air- 
port," I say. "But I'm not sure even Jonah's help will do any 
good." 
Hearing this, Dave is shocked. He says, "You mean ... all 
that stuff we learned about on the hike, about Herbie setting the 
speed for the whole troop and all that—none of that was true?" 
"Of course it's still true, Dave," I tell him. "The problem is, 
we discovered we've got two Herbies at the plant, and they're 
right where we don't want them. It  would be as if we couldn't 
rearrange the boys on the trail an d Herbie had a twin brother— 
and now they're both stuck in the middle of the line. They're 
holding everything up. We can't move them. We've got piles and 
piles of inventory stacked up in front of them. I don't know what 
we can do." 
Mom says, "Well, if they can't do the work, you'll just have to 
let them go."  
Captured by Plamen T.
155
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"It's not people; it's equipment," I explain. "We can't fire 
machines. And, anyway, what they do is essential. We couldn't 
produce most of our products without these two operations." 
"So why don't you make them  go faster?" asks Sharon. 
"Sure, Dad," says Davey. "Remember what happened on the 
hike when you took Herbie's pack from him? Maybe you could 
do something kind of like that in the plant." 
"Yeah, but it's not quite that simple," I say. 
Mom says, "Alex, I know you'll do  the best you can. If you've 
got these two slow pokes holding everything up, you'll just have 
to keep after them and make sure they don't waste any more 
time." 
I say, "Yeah, well, I've got to run. Don't wait up for me. I'll 
see you in the morning." 
Waiting at the gate, I watch Jonah's plane taxi up to the 
terminal. I talked to him in Boston this afternoon just before he 
was leaving for Los Angeles. I told  him I wanted to thank him for 
his advice, but that the situation at the plant was impossible so far 
as we could see. 
"Alex, how do you know it's impossible?" he asked. 
I told him, "We've only got two months left before my boss 
goes to the board of directors with his recommendation. If we 
had more time, maybe we could do something, but with only two 
months. . . ." 
"Two months is still enough time to show an improvement," 
he said. "But you have to learn how to run your plant by its 
constraints." 
"Jonah, we've analyzed the situation thoroughly—' 
He said, "Alex, there are two wa ys that the ideas I'm giving 
you won't work. One is if there isn't any demand for the products 
your plant makes." 
"No, we have a demand, although it's shrinking as our prices 
go up and service deteriorates," I said. "But we still have a size- 
able backlog of orders." 
"I also can't help you if you' re determined not to change. 
Have you made up your mind to  do nothing and let the plant 
close?" 
"It's not that we want to give up," I told him. "It's that we 
don't see any other possibilities."  
Captured by Plamen T.
156
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Okay then. Have you tried to ta ke some of the load off the 
bottlenecks by using other resources?" he asked. 
"You mean offloading? We can't. These are the only two re- 
sources of their type in the plant." 
He paused for a moment and finally he said, "All right, one 
more question: Does Bearington have an airport?" 
And so here he is tonight, walking out of Gate Two. He 
changed his flight to Los Angele s to make a stop here for the 
evening. I walk up to him and shake his hand. 
"How was your flight?" I ask him. 
"Have you ever spent time in a sardine can?" he says, then 
adds, "I shouldn't complain. I'm still breathing." 
"Well, thanks for coming," I tell him. "I appreciate you 
changing your plans, alt hough I'm still not sure you can help us." 
"Alex, having a bottleneck—" 
"Two bottlenecks," I remind him. 
"Having two bottlenecks doesn't mean you can't make 
money," he says. "Quite the contrary, in fact. Most manufactur- 
ing plants do not have bottlenecks. They have enormous excess 
capacity. But they should have them—one on every part they 
make." 
He reads the puzzled look on my face. 
"You don't understand, but you will," he said. "Now I want 
you to give me as much backgro und on your plant as you can." 
All the way from the airport, I talk non-stop about our pre- 
dicament. When we reach the plan t, I park the Mazda in front of 
the offices. Waiting for us inside are Bob, Lou, Stacey and Ralph. 
They're standing around the vacant receptionist's desk. Everyone 
is cordial, but as I make the introductions I can tell the staff is 
waiting to see if this Jonah guy—who bears no resemblance to 
any consultant they've ever seen  walk through the door—really 
knows what he's doing. Jonah stands in front of them and begins 
to pace as he talks. 
"Alex called me today because you perceive a problem with 
the bottlenecks you've discovered in  your plant," says Jonah. "Ac- 
tually, you are experiencing a co mbination of several problems. 
But first things first. From what  Alex has told me, your most 
immediate need is to increase th roughput and improve your cash 
flow. Am I right?"  
Captured by Plamen T.
157
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"That sure would be a big help," says Lou. "How do you 
think we might be ab le to do that?" 
"Your bottlenecks are not maintaining a flow sufficient to 
meet demand and make money," he says. "So there is only one 
thing to do. We have to find more capacity." 
"But we don't have the money fo r more capacity," says Lou. 
"Or the time to inst all it," says Bob. 
"I'm not talking about more capacity from one end of the 
plant to the other," says Jonah. "T o increase the capacity of the 
plant is to increase the capacity of only the bottlenecks." 
"You mean make them into non-bottlenecks," says Stacey. 
"No," he says. "Absolutely not. The bottlenecks stay bottle- 
necks. What we must do is find enough capacity for the bottle- 
necks to become more equal to demand." 
"Where're we going to find it?" asks Bob. "You mean it's just 
layin' around out there?" 
"In effect, yes," says Jonah. "If you are like most manufac- 
turers, you will have capacity that is hidden from you because 
some of your thinking is incorrect. And I suggest that first of all 
we go into your plant and see for ourselves exactly how you are 
managing your two bottlenecks." 
"Why not," I say. "After all, no one visits this plant and es- 
capes without a tour." 
The six of us put on the safety glasses and hats and go into 
the plant. Jonah and I head the column as we walk through the 
double doors into the orange light. It's about halfway into second 
shift now and somewhat quieter th an it is on day turn. That's 
good because it lets us hear ea ch other better when we talk. I 
point out various stages of prod uction to Jonah as we walk. I 
notice Jonah's eyes measuring the stacks of inventory piled every- 
where. I try to hurry us along. 
"This is our NCX-10 n/c machine," I tell Jonah as we arrive 
at the big machine. 
"And this is your bottleneck, correct?" asks Jonah. 
"One of them," I say. 
"Can you tell me why isn't it working right now?" asks Jo- 
nah. 
Indeed, the NCX-10 is stopped at the moment. 
I say, "Well . . . ah, good question. Bob, why isn't the 
NCX-10 running?" 
Bob glances at his watch.  
Captured by Plamen T.
158
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Probably because the set-up people went on break about ten 
minutes ago," says Bob. "They should be back in about twenty 
minutes." 
"There is a clause in our union contract which stipulates 
there must be a half-hour break after every four hours of work," 
I explain to Jonah. 
He asks, "But why should they take their break now instead 
of when the machine is running?" 
Bob says, "Because it was eight o'clock and—" 
Jonah holds up his hands and says, "Wait a minute. On any 
non-bottleneck machine in your plant, no problem. Because, after 
all, some percentage of a non-bottleneck's time should be idle. So 
who cares when those people take their breaks? It's no big deal. 
But on a bottleneck? It's exactly the opposite." 
He points to the NCX-10 and says, "You have on this ma- 
chine only so many hours available for production—what is it 
. . . 600, 700 hours?" 
"It's around 585 hours a month," says Ralph. 
"Whatever is available, the demand is even greater," says 
Jonah. "If you lose one of those hours, or even half of it, you have 
lost it forever. You cannot recover it someplace else in the system. 
Your throughput for the entire plant will be lower by whatever 
amount the bottleneck produces in that time. And that makes an 
enormously expensive lunch break." 
"But we have a union to deal with," says Bob. 
Jonah says, "So talk to them. They have a stake in this plant. 
They're not stupid. But you have to make them understand." 
Yeah, I'm thinking; that's easier said than done. On the 
other hand . . . 
Jonah is walking around the NC X-10 now, but he's not just 
looking at it alone. He's looking at other equipment in the plant. 
He comes back to us. 
"You've told me this is the onl y machine of its type in the 
plant," says Jonah, "But this is a relatively new machine. Where 
are the older machines that this one replaced? Do you still have 
those?" 
Bob says vaguely, "Well, some of them we do. Some of them 
we got rid of. They were practically antiques." 
"Do you have at least one of each type of the older machines 
necessary to do what this X-what -ever-it-is machine does?" Jonah 
asks. 
Captured by Plamen T.
159
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementLou edges in and and says, "Excuse me, but you're not actu- 
ally suggesting we use that old equipment, are you?" 
"If it's still operational, then yes, I might suggest it," says 
Jonah. 
Lou's eyes blink. 
He says, "Well, I'm not sure what that would do to our cost 
profile. But I have to tell you that those old machines are going to 
be much more expensive to operate." 
Jonah says, "We'll deal with that directly. First, I just want to 
know if you have the machines or not." 
For the answer, we turn to Bob—who chuckles. 
"Sorry to disappoint you all," he says, "but we got rid of an 
entire class of machine that we'd need to supplement the 
NCX-10." 
"Why did we go do a dumb  thing like that?" I ask. 
Bob says, "We needed the floor space for that new pen to 
hold inventory." 
I say, "Oh." 
"It seemed like a good idea at the time," says Stacey. 
Moving right along to heat-treat, we gather in front of the 
furnaces. 
The first thing Jonah does is look at the stacks of parts and 
ask, "Are you sure all this inventory requires heat-treat?" 
"Oh, absolutely," says Bob. 
"There are no alternatives in the processing ahead of this 
department that would prevent the need for heat-treat on at least 
some of these parts?" he asks. 
We all look at each other. 
"I guess we'd have to consult with engineering," I say. Bob 
rolls his eyes. 
"What's the matter?" I ask. 
"Let's just say our friends in engineering aren't as responsive 
as they could be," says Bob. "They're not too happy about chang- 
ing requirements. Their attitude is usually, 'Do it this way be- 
cause we said so.'' 
To Jonah, I say, "I'm afraid he  does have a point. Even if we 
can get them to cooperate, it might take a month of Sundays for 
them to approve it." 
Jonah says, "Okay, let me ask you this: are there vendors in 
the area who can heat-treat parts for you?"  
Captured by Plamen T.
160
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"There are," says Stacey, "but going outside would increase 
our cost-per-part." 
The expression on Jonah's face says he's getting a little bored 
with this stonewalling. He point s at the mountains of parts. 
"How much money is represente d in that pile?" he asks. 
Lou says, "I don't know . . . maybe ten or fifteen thousand 
dollars in parts." 
"No, it isn't thousands of dollars, not if this is a bottleneck," 
says Jonah, "Think again. It's considerably more." 
Stacey says, "I can go dig up the records if you like, but the 
c o s t  w o n ' t  b e  m u c h  m o r e  t h a n  w h a t  L o u  s a i d .  A t  t h e  m o s t ,  I ' d  
guess we've got about twenty t housands dollars in material—" 
"No, no," says Jonah. "I'm not just talking about the cost of 
materials. How many products are you going to sell to customers 
as soon as you can pro cess this entire pile?" 
The staff and I talk among ourselves for a moment. 
"It's kind of hard to say," says Bob. 
"We're not sure all the parts in that pile would translate into 
immediate sales," says Stacey. 
"Oh really? You are making your bottlenecks work on parts 
that will not contribute to throughput?" asks Jonah. 
"Well . . . some of them become spare parts or they go into 
finished goods inventory. Eventually it becomes throughput," 
says Lou. 
"Eventually," says Jonah. "And, meanwhile, how big did you 
say your backlog of overdue orders is?" 
I explain to him that sometime s we inflate the batch quanti- 
ties to improve efficiency. 
"Tell me again how this improves your efficiency," says Jo- 
nah. 
I  f e e l  m y s e l f  s t a r t i n g  t o  t u r n  r e d  w i t h  t h e  m e m o r y  o f  e a r l i e r  
conversations. 
"Okay, never mind that for now," says Jonah. "Let's concern 
ourselves strictly with throughpu t. I'll put my question differ- 
ently: how many products are you unable to ship because you are 
missing the parts in that pile?" 
That's easier to determine because we know what our back- 
log is. I tell him how many millions we've got in backlog and 
about what percent of that is held up on account of bottleneck 
parts. 
Captured by Plamen T.
161
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"And if you could finish the parts in that pile, you could 
assemble and ship the product?" he asks. 
"Sure, no problem," says Bob. 
"And what is the selling price of each unit?" 
"About a thousand dollars a unit  on the average," says Lou, 
"although it varies, of course." 
"Then we are not dealing with ten or fifteen or even twenty 
thousand dollars here," says Jona h. "Because we are dealing with 
how many parts in that pile?" 
"Perhaps, a thousand," says Stacey. 
"And each part means you can ship a product?" 
"Generally, yes," she says. 
"And each product shipped means a thousand dollars," says 
Jonah. "A thousand units times a thousand dollars is how much 
money?" 
In unison, our faces turn  toward the mountain. 
"One million dollars," I say with awe. 
"On one condition!" says Jonah. "That you get these parts in 
and out of heat-treat and shippe d as a finished product before 
your customers get tired of waiting and go elsewhere!" 
He looks at us, his eyes sh ifting from face to face. 
"Can you afford to rule out any possibility," he asks, "espe- 
cially one that is as easy to  invoke as a change in policy?" 
Everyone is quiet. 
"By the way, I'll tell you more about how to look at the costs 
in a moment. But one more thing," says Jonah. "I want to know 
where you do quality inspect ion on bottleneck parts." 
I explain to him that most insp ection is done prior to final 
assembly. 
"Show me," says Jonah. 
So we go to an area where we do quality inspections. Jonah 
asks about bottleneck parts that we reject. Immediately, Bob 
points to a pallet stacked with shiny steel parts. On top of them is 
a pink sheet of paper, which indicates rejection by Quality Con- 
trol, or Q.C. as it's known. Bob picks up the job jacket and reads 
the forms inside. 
"I'm not sure what's wrong wi th these, but they must be 
defective for some reason," says Bob. 
Jonah asks, "Did these parts come through a bottleneck?" 
"Yeah, they did," says Bob.  
Captured by Plamen T.
162
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Do you realize what the rejection by Q.C. has done to you?" 
asks Jonah. 
"It means we have to scrap about a hundred parts," says 
Bob. 
"No, think again," says Jonah. "These are bottleneck parts." 
It dawns on me what he's getting at. 
"We lost the time on the bottleneck," I say. 
Jonah whirls toward me. 
"Exactly right!" he says. "And what does lost time on a bot- 
tleneck mean? It means you have lost throughput." 
"But you're not saying we should ignore quality, are you?" 
asks Bob. 
"Absolutely not. You can't make money for long without a 
quality product," says Jonah. "But  I am suggesting you use qual- 
ity control in a different way." 
I ask, "You mean we should pu t Q.C. in front of the bottle- 
necks?" 
Jonah raises a finger and says, "Very perceptive of you. Make 
sure the bottleneck works only on good parts by weeding out the 
ones that are defective. If you scrap a part before it reaches the 
bottleneck, all you have lost is a scrapped part. But if you scrap 
the part after it's passed the bottleneck, you have lost time that 
cannot be recovered." 
"Suppose we get sub-standard quality downstream from the 
bottleneck?" says Stacey. 
"That's another aspect of the same idea," says Jonah. "Be 
sure the process controls on bottleneck parts are very good, so 
these parts don't become defective in later processing. Are you 
with me?" 
Bob says, "Just one question: where do we get the inspec- 
tors?" 
"What's wrong with shifting the ones you already have to the 
bottlenecks?" asks Jonah. 
"That's something we can think about," I tell him. 
"Good. Let's go back to the offices," says Jonah. 
We go back to the office building and meet in the conference 
room. 
"I want to be absolutely sure  you understand the importance 
of the bottlenecks," says Jonah. "E very time a bottleneck finishes 
a part, you are making it possible to ship a finished product. And 
how much does that mean to you in sales?"  
Captured by Plamen T.
163
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"It averages around a thousand dollars a unit," says Lou. 
"And you're worried about spending a dollar or two at the 
bottlenecks to make them more produc tive?" he asks. "First of all, 
what do you think the cost of, let's say, the X machine is for one 
hour?" 
Lou says, "That's well established. It costs us $32.50 per 
hour." 
"And heat-treat?" 
"That's $21 per hour," says Lou. 
"Both of those amounts are incorrect," says Jonah. 
"But our cost data—" 
"The numbers are wrong, not because you have made a cal- 
culating error, but because the costs were determined as if these 
work centers existed in isolation, " says Jonah. "Let me explain: 
when I was a physicist, people wo uld come to me from time to 
time with problems in mathematics they couldn't solve. Thev 
wanted me to check their numbers for them. But after a while I 
learned not to waste my time checking the numbers—because the 
numbers were almost always right. However, if I checked the 
assumptions, they were almost always wrong." 
Jonah pulls a cigar out of his pocket and lights it with a 
match. 
"That's what's going on here," he says between puffs. "You 
have calculated the cost of opera ting these two works centers ac- 
cording to standard accounting procedures . . . without consid- 
ering the fact that both are bottlenecks." 
"How does that change their costs?" asks Lou. 
"What you have learned is that the capacity of the plant is 
equal to the capacity of its bottlenecks," says Jonah. "Whatever 
the bottlenecks produce in an hour is the equivalent of what the 
plant produces in an hour. So ... an hour lost at a bottleneck is 
an hour lost for the entire system." 
"Right, we're with you," says Lou. 
"Then how much would it cost for this entire plant to be idle 
for one hour?" asks Jonah. 
"I really can't say, but it would be very expensive," admits 
Lou. 
"Tell me something," asks Jonah . "How much does it cost 
you to operate your plant each month?" 
Lou says, "Our total operating expense is around $1.6 mil- 
lion per month."  
Captured by Plamen T.
164
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"And let's just take the X mach ine as an example," he says. 
"How many hours a month did you say it's available for produc- 
tion?" 
"About 585," says Ralph. 
"The actual cost of a bottleneck is the total expense of the 
system divided by the number of hours the bottleneck produces," 
says Jonah. "What does this make it?" 
Lou takes out his calculator from his coat pocket and 
punches in the numbers. 
"That's $2,735," says Lou. "N ow wait a minute. Is that 
right?" 
"Yes, it's right," says Jonah.  "If your bottlenecks are not 
working, you haven't just lost $32 or  $21. The true cost is the cost 
of an hour of the entire sy stem. And that's twenty seven hundred 
dollars." 
Lou is flabbergasted. 
"That puts a different perspective on it," says Stacey. 
"Of course it does," says Jonah . "And with that in mind, how 
do we optimize the use of the bottlenecks? There are two princi- 
pal themes on which you need to concentrate . . . 
"First, make sure the bottlenec ks' time is not wasted," he 
says. "How is the time of a bottlen eck wasted? One way is for it to 
be sitting idle during a lunch break. Another is for it to be pro- 
cessing parts which are already defective—or which will become 
defective through a careless worker or poor process control. A 
third way to waste a bottleneck's time is to make it work on parts 
you don't need." 
"You mean spare parts?" asks Bob. 
"I mean anything that isn't within the current demand," he 
says. "Because what happens when you build inventory now that 
you won't sell for months in the future? You are sacrificing pres- 
ent money for future money; the question is, can your cash flow 
sustain it? In your case, absolutely not." 
"He's right," admits Lou. 
"Then make the bottlenecks work only on what will contrib- 
ute to throughput today . . . not nine months from now," says 
Jonah. "That's one way to increase the capacity of the bottle- 
necks. The other way you increase  bottleneck capacity is to take 
some of the load off the bottl enecks and give it to non-bottle- 
necks." 
I ask, "Yeah, but how do we do that?"  
Captured by Plamen T.
165
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"That's why I was asking those questions when we were out 
in the plant," he says. "Do all of the parts have to be processed by 
the bottleneck? If not, the ones which don't can be shifted to non- 
bottlenecks for processing. And the result is you gain capacity on 
your bottleneck. A second question: do you have other machines 
to do the same process? If you have  the machines, or if you have a 
vendor with the right equipment, you can offload from the bottle- 
neck. And, again, you gain capacit y which enables you to increase 
throughput." 
I come into the kitchen for br eakfast the next morning and 
sit down to a big steaming bowl of my mother's oatmeal . . . 
which I have hated ever since I was a kid. I'm staring at the 
oatmeal (and the oatmeal is staring back) when Mom/Grandma 
asks, "So how did everyt hing go last night?" 
I say, "Well, actually, you and the kids were on the right 
track at dinner." 
"We were?" asks Dave. 
"We need to make the Herbies go  faster," I say. "And last 
night Jonah pointed out some ways to do that. So we learned a 
lot." 
"Well, now, isn't that good news," says my mother. 
She pours a cup of coffee for herself and sits down at the 
table. It's quiet for a moment. Then I notice that Mom and the 
kids are eyeing each other. 
"Something wrong?" I ask. 
"Their mother called again last night while you were gone," 
says my mother. 
Julie has been calling the kids re gularly since she left. But for 
whatever reason of her own, she st ill won't tell them where she is. 
I'm debating whether to hire a pr ivate detective to find out where 
she's hiding. 
"Sharon says she heard some thing when she was on the 
phone talking," says my mother. 
I look at Sharon. 
"You know that music Grandpa al ways listens to?" she says. 
I say, "You mean Grandpa Barnett?" 
"Uh-huh, you know," she says, "the music that puts you to 
sleep, with the—what are they called?" 
"Violins," says Dave.  
Captured by Plamen T.
166
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Right, the violins," says Shar on. "Well, when Mom wasn't 
talking, I heard that on  the phone last night." 
"I heard 'em too," says Dave. 
"Really?" I say. "That's very interesting. Thank you both for 
noticing that. Maybe I'll give Grandma and Grandpa Barnett an- 
other call today." 
I finish my coffee and stand up. 
"Alex, you haven't even touched your oatmeal," says Mom. 
I lean down and kiss her on the cheek. "Sorry, I'm late for 
school." 
I wave to the kids and hurry to grab my briefcase. 
"Well, I'll just have to save it so you can eat it tomorrow," 
says my mother.  
Captured by Plamen T.
167
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement20 
Driving to the plant, I pass the motel where Jonah stayed last 
night. I know he's long gone—he had a 6:30 A.M. flight to catch. I 
offered to pick him up this morn ing and drive him to the airport, 
but (lucky for me) he refused and said he'd take a cab. 
As soon as I get to the office, I tell Fran to set up a meeting 
with the staff. Meanwhile, I start to write down a list of the actions 
Jonah suggested last night. But Julie comes to mind and won't 
leave. I close my office door and sit down at my desk. I find the 
number for Julie's parents and dial it. 
The first day after Julie left, he r parents called to ask me if I 
had heard anything. They haven't called back since. A day or two 
ago, I tried getting in touch with them to find out if they had 
heard anything. I called in the af ternoon and I talked to Julie's 
mother, Ada. She said she didn't  know where Julie was. Even 
then, I didn't quite believe her. 
Now Ada answers again. 
"Hi, this is Alex," I tell her. "Let me talk to Julie." 
Ada is flustered. "Well, um, ah ... she isn't here." 
"Yes, she is." 
I hear Ada sigh. 
"She is there, isn't she," I say. 
Finally Ada says, "She does not want to talk to you." 
"How long, Ada? How long has she been there? Were you 
lying to me even that Sunday night when I called?" 
"No, we were not lying to you," she says indignantly. "We 
had no idea where she was. She was with her friend, Jane, for a 
few days." 
"Sure, and what about the other day when I called?" 
"Julie simply asked me not to say where she was," says Ada, 
"and I shouldn't even be telling you now. She wants to be by 
herself for a while." 
"Ada, I need to speak with her," I say. 
"She will not come to the phone," says Ada. 
"How do you know until you've asked?" 
The phone on Ada's end is put down on the table. Footsteps 
fade away and return a minute later.  
Captured by Plamen T.
168
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"She says she'll call you when  she's ready," says Ada. 
"What does that mean?" 
"If you hadn't neglected her all these years, you wouldn't be 
in this situation," she says. 
"Ada—" 
"Good-bye," she says. 
She hangs up the phone. I try calling back right away, but 
there is no answer. After a few mi nutes, I force my mind back to 
getting ready to talk to the staff. 
At ten o'clock, the meetin g starts in my office. 
"I'd like to know what you th ink about what you heard last 
night," I say. "Lou, w hat was your reaction?" 
Lou says, "Well . . . I just couldn't believe what he was say- 
ing about an hour of a bottleneck. I went home last night and 
thought it over to see if it all ma de sense. And, actually, we were 
wrong about a lost hour of a bottleneck costing $2,700." 
"We were?" I ask. 
"Only eighty percent of our pr oducts flow through the bot- 
tlenecks," says Lou as he takes a piece of note paper from his 
shirt pocket. "So the truer cost ought to be eighty percent of our 
operating expense, and that co mes to $2,188 an hour—not 
$2,735." 
"Oh," I say. "I suppose you're right." 
Then Lou smiles. 
"Nevertheless," he says, "I have to admit it was quite an eye- 
opener to look at the situation from that perspective." 
"I agree," I say. "What about the rest of you?" 
I go from person to person around the office asking for reac- 
tions, and we're all pretty much in agreement. Even so, Bob 
seems hesitant about committing to some of the changes Jonah 
was talking about. And Ralph isn't sure yet where he fits in. But 
Stacey is a strong advocate. 
She sums up, saying, "I think it makes enough sense to risk 
the changes." 
"Although I'm nervous about anything that increases operat- 
ing expense at this point in time," says Lou, "I agree with Stacey. 
As Jonah said, we may face a bigger risk just staying on the path 
we've been following." 
Bob raises one of his meaty hands in preparation for a com- 
ment. 
Captured by Plamen T.
169
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Okay, but some of what Jonah talked about will be easier 
and faster to make happen than the rest," he says. "Why don't we 
go ahead with the easier things right away and see what kind of 
effect they have while we're developing the others." 
I tell him, "That sounds reasonable. What would you do 
first?" 
"I think I'd wanna move the Q.C. inspection points first, to 
check parts going into the bottl enecks," says Bob. "The other 
Q.C. measures will take a little ti me, but we can have an inspector 
checking pre-bottleneck parts in no time—by the end of today if 
you want." 
I nod. "Good. What about ne w rules for lunch breaks?" 
"We might have a squawk or tw o from the union," he says. 
I shake my head. "I think they' ll go along with it. Work out 
the details and I'll talk to O'Donnell." 
Bob makes a note on the paper pad on his lap. I stand up 
and step around the desk to emph asize what I'm about to say. 
"One of the questions Jonah raised last night really struck 
home for me," I tell them. "Why are we making the bottlenecks 
work on inventory that won't increase throughput?" 
Bob looks at Stacey, and she looks back at him. 
"That's a good question," she says. 
Bob says, "We made the decision—" 
"I know the decision," I say. "Build inventory to maintain 
efficiencies." But our problem is not efficiencies. Our problem is 
our backlog of overdue orders. And it's very visible to our cus- 
tomers and to division management . We positively must do some- 
thing to improve our due-date performance, and Jonah has given 
us the insight on what th at something has to be. 
"Until now, we've expedited orders on the basis of who's 
screamed the loudest," I say. "F rom now on, late orders should 
get first priority over the others. An order that's two weeks late 
gets priority over an order that 's one week late, and so on." 
"We've tried that from time to time in the past," says Stacey. 
"Yes, but the key this time is we make sure the bottlenecks are 
processing parts for those late orders according to the same pri- 
ority," I say. 
"That's the sane approach to the problem, Al," says Bob, 
"Now how do we make it happen?" 
"We have to find out which inventory en route to the bottle- 
necks is needed for late orders and which is simply going to end 
Captured by Plamen T.
170
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementup in a warehouse. So here's what we need to do," I say. "Ralph, 
I want you to make us a list of all the overdue orders. Have them 
ranked in priority ranging from the most days overdue to the 
least days overdue. How soon can you have that for us?" 
"Well, that in itself won't take very long," he says. "The prob- 
lem is we've got the monthlies to run." 
I shake my head. "Nothing is more important to us right 
now than making the bottlenecks more productive. We need that 
list as soon as possible, because on ce you've got it, I want you to 
work with Stacey and her people in inventory control—find out 
what parts still have to be processed by either of the bottlenecks 
to complete those orders." 
I turn to Stacey. 
"After you know which parts are missing, get together with 
Bob and schedule the bottlenecks to start working on the parts 
for the latest order first, the next latest, and so on." 
"What about the parts that don't go through either one of 
the bottlenecks?" asks Bob. 
"I'm not going to worry about those at the moment," I tell 
him. "Let's work on the assumpti on that anything not needing to 
go through a bottleneck is either  waiting in front of assembly 
already, or will be by the time  the bottleneck parts arrive." 
Bob nods. 
"Everybody got it?" I ask. "Nothing else takes priority over 
this. We don't have time to take a step back and do some kind of 
headquarters number where everyone takes six months to think 
about it. We know what we have  to do. Let's get it done." 
That evening, I'm driving along the Interstate. Around sun- 
set, I'm looking around at the rooftops of suburban houses to 
either side of the highway. A si gn goes by which says I'm two 
miles from the exit to Forest Grov e. Julie's parents live in Forest 
Grove. I take that exit.  
Neither the Barnetts nor Julie know I'm coming. I told my 
mother not to tell the kids. I simply hopped in the car after work 
and headed down here. I've had enough of this hide-and-seek 
game she's playing. 
From a four-lane highway, I turn onto a smooth blacktop 
street which winds through a quiet neighborhood. It's a nice 
neighborhood. The homes are unqu estionably expensive and the 
lawns without exception are imma culate. The streets are lined 
Captured by Plamen T.
171
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementwith trees just getting the new leaves of spring. They are brilliant 
green in the golden setting sun. 
I see the house halfway down the street. It's the two-story 
brick colonial painted white. It has shutters. The shutters are 
made of aluminum and have no hinges; they are non-functional 
but traditional. This is where Julie grew up. 
I park the Mazda by the curb in  front of the house. I look up 
the driveway, and sure enough, there is Julie's Accord in front of 
the garage. 
Before I have reached the front door, it opens. Ada Barnett 
is standing behind the screen. I see her hand reach down and 
click the screen door lock as I approach. 
"Hello," I say. 
"I told you she doesn't want to talk to you," says Ada. 
"Will you just ask her please?" I ask. "She is my wife." 
"If you want to talk to Julie, you can do it through her law- 
yer," says Ada. 
She starts to close the door. 
I say, "Ada, I am not leaving un til I talk to your daughter." 
"If you don't leave, I will call the police to have you removed 
from our property," says Ada Barnett. 
"Then I will wait in my car," I say. "You don't own the 
street." 
The door closes. I walk across the lawn and over the side- 
walk, and get in the Mazda. I si t there and stare at the house. 
Every so often, I notice the curt ains move behind the window 
glass of the Barnett house. After about forty five minutes, the sun 
has set and I'm seriously wonderin g how long I can sit here when 
the front door opens again. 
Julie walks out. She's wearin g jeans and sneakers and a 
sweater. The jeans and sneakers make her look young. She re- 
minds me of a teenager meeting a boyfriend her parents disap- 
prove of. She comes across the lawn and I get out of the car. 
When she's about ten feet away she stops, as if she's worried 
about getting too close, where I mi ght grab her, pull her into the 
car, and drive like the wind to my tent in the desert or something. 
We look each other over. I slide my hands into my pockets. 
For openers, I say, "So . . . how have you been?" 
"If you want to know the truth, " she says, "I've been rotten. 
How have you been?" 
"Worried about you."  
Captured by Plamen T.
172
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementShe glances away. I slap the roof of the Mazda. 
"Let's go for a ride," I say. 
"No, I can't," she says. 
"How about a walk then?" I ask. 
"Alex, just tell me what you want, okay?" she says. 
"I want to know why you're doing this!" 
"Because I don't know if I want to be married to you any- 
more," she says. "Isn't that obvious?" 
"Okay, can't we talk about it?" 
She says nothing. 
"Come on," I say. "Let's take  that walk—just once around 
the block. Unless you want to give the neighbors lots to talk 
about." 
Julie looks around at the houses and realizes we're a specta- 
cle. Awkwardly, she steps toward me. I hold out my hand. She 
doesn't take it, but we turn together and begin a stroll down the 
sidewalk. I wave to the Barnett house and note the flurry of a 
curtain. Julie and I walk a hundred feet or so in the twilight 
before we say anything. At last I break the silence. 
"Look, I'm sorry about what happ ened that weekend," I tell 
her. "But what else could I do? Davey expected me—" 
"It wasn't because you went on  the hike with Davey," she 
says. "That was just the last straw.  All of a sudden, I just couldn't 
stand it anymore. I had to get away." 
"Julie, why didn't you at least let me know where you were?" 
"Listen," she says. "I went away from you so I could be 
alone." 
Hesitantly, I ask, "So ... do you want a divorce?" 
"I don't know yet," she says. 
"Well, when will you know?" 
"Al, this has been a very mixed up time for me," she says. "I 
don't know what to do. I can't decide anything. My mother tells 
me one thing. My father tells me  something else. My friends tell 
me something else. Everyone ex cept me knows what I should 
do." 
"You went off to be by yourself to make a decision that's 
joing to affect both of us as well as our kids. And you're listening 
:o everyone except the three other people whose lives are going 
;o be screwed up if you don't come back," I say. 
"This is something I need to figure out on my own, away 
Tom the pressures of you three."  
Captured by Plamen T.
173
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"All I'm  suggesting is that we talk about what's bothering 
you." 
She sighs in exasperation and says, "Al, we've been over it a 
million times already!" 
"Okay, look, just tell me this : are you having an affair?" 
Julie stops. We have reached the corner. 
She says coldly, "I think I've  gone far enough with you." 
I stand there for a moment as she turns and heads back 
toward her parents' house. I catch up with her. 
I say, "Well? Are you or aren't you?" 
"Of course I'm not having an affair!" she yells. "Do you think 
I'd be staying with my parents if I were having an affair?" 
A man who is walking his dog tu rns and stares at us. Julie 
and I stride past him in stiff silence. 
I whisper to Julie, "I just ha d to know . . . that's all." 
"If you think I'd leave my children just to go have a fling 
with some stranger, you have no understanding of who I am,'' 
she says. 
I feel as if she'd slapped my face. 
"Julie, I'm sorry," I tell her. "That kind of thing sometimes 
happens, and I just needed to make sure of what's going on." 
She slows her walk. I put my hand on her shoulder. She 
brushes it off. 
"Al, I've been unhappy for a long time," she says. "And I'll 
tell you something: I feel guilty about it. I feel as though I don't 
have a right to be unhappy. I just know I am." 
With irritation, I see we're bac k in front of her parents' 
house. The walk was too short. Ada is standing in plain view at 
the window. Julie and I stop. I lean against the rear fender of the 
Mazda. 
"Why don't you pack your things and come home with me," 
I suggest, but she's shaking her head before I've even finished 
the sentence. 
"No, I'm not ready to do that," she says. 
"Okay, look," I say. "The choice is this: You stay away and we 
get a divorce. Or we get back together and struggle to make the 
marriage work. The longer you st ay away, the more we're going 
to drift apart from each other and toward a divorce. And if we get 
a divorce, you know what's going to happen. We've seen it hap- 
pen over and over to our friends.  D o  y o u  r e a l l y  w a n t  t h a t ?  C o m e  
on, come home. I promise we can make it better." 
Captured by Plamen T.
174
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementShe shakes her head. "I can't, Al. I've heard too many prom- 
ises before." 
I say, "Then you want a divorce?" 
Julie says, "I told you, I don't know!" 
"Okay," I say finally. "I can't make up your mind for you. 
Maybe it is your decision. All I can say is I want you back. I'm 
s u r e  t h a t ' s  w h a t  t h e  k i d s  w a n t  t o o .  G i v e  m e  a  c a l l  w h e n  y o u  k n o w  
what you want." 
"That was exactly what I planned to do, Al." 
I get into the Mazda and star t the engine. Rolling down the 
window, I look up at her as she stands on the sidewalk next to the 
car. 
"You know, I do happen to  love you," I tell her. 
This finally melts her. She comes to the car and leans down. 
Reaching through the window, I take her hand for a moment. 
She kisses me. Then without a wo rd she stands up and walks 
away; halfway across the lawn, she breaks into a run. I watch her 
until she's disappeared through the door. Then I shake my head, 
put the car into gear, and drive away.  
Captured by Plamen T.
175
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement21 
I'm home by ten o'clock that night . Depressed, but home . 
Rummaging through the refrigerator, I attempt to find dinner, 
but have to settle for cold spaghetti and some leftover peas. Wash- 
ing it down with some leftover vodka, I dine in dejection. 
I'm wondering while I'm eating what I'm going to do if Julie 
doesn't come back. If I don't have a wife, do I start to date 
women again? Where would I meet them? I have a sudden vision 
of myself standing in the bar of the Bearington Holiday Inn, 
attempting to be sexy while asking strange females, "What's your 
sign?" 
Is that my fate? My God. And anyway , do lines like that even 
work these days? Did they ever? 
I must know somebody to go out with. 
For a while, I sit there thinking  of all the available women I 
know. Who would go out with me? Whom would I want to go out 
with? It doesn't take long to exhaust the list. Then one woman 
comes to mind. Getting up from my  chair, I go to the phone and 
spend about five minutes staring at it. 
Should I? 
Nervously, I dial the number. I hang up before it rings. I 
stare at the phone some more. Oh, what the hell! All she can do is 
say no, right? I dial the number again. It rings about ten times 
before anyone answers. 
"Hello." It's her father. 
"May I speak to Julie please." 
Pause. "Just a minute." 
The moments pass. 
"Hello?" says Julie. 
"Hi, it's me." 
"Al?" 
I say, "Yeah, listen, I know it's late, but I just want to ask you 
something." 
"If it has to do with getting a divorce or coming home—" 
"No, no, no," I tell her. "I was just wondering if while you're 
making up your mind, there would be any harm in us seeing 
each other once in a while."  
Captured by Plamen T.
176
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementShe says, "Well ... I guess not." 
"Good. What are you doing Saturday night?" I ask. 
There is a moment of silence as  the smile forms on her face. 
Amused, she asks, "Are you asking me for a date?" 
"Yes, I am." 
Long pause. 
I say, "So would you like to go out with me?" 
"Yes, I'd like that a lot," she says finally. 
"Great. How about I see you at 7:30?" 
"I'll be ready," she says. 
The next morning in the conference room, we've got the two 
supervisors of the bottlenecks with us. By "us," I mean Stacey, 
Bob, Ralph and me. Ted Spencer is the supervisor responsible for 
the heat-treat furnaces. He's an older guy with hair that looks like 
steel wool and a body like a steel  file. We've got him and Mario 
DeMonte, supervisor of the machining center with the NCX-10. 
Mario is as old as Ted, but plumper. 
Stacey and Ralph both have re d eyes. Before we sat down, 
they told me about the work that went into this morning's meet- 
ing. 
Getting the list of overdue orders was easy. The computer 
listed them and sorted them accord ing to lateness. Nothing to it, 
didn't even take a minute. But then  they had to go over the bills of 
material for each of the orders and find out which parts are done 
by the bottlenecks. And they had to establish whether there was 
inventory to make those parts. That took most of the night. 
We all have our own photocopies of a hand-written list Ralph 
has had prepared. Listed in the print-out is a grand total of sixty 
seven records, our total backlo g of overdue orders. They have 
been sorted from most-days-past-due to least-days. The worst 
one, at the top of the list, is an order that is fifty eight days 
beyond the delivery date promised by marketing. The best are 
one day late; there are three of those orders. 
"We did some checking," says Ra lph. "And about ninety per- 
cent of the current overdues have parts that flow through one or 
both of the bottleneck operations. Of those, about eighty five per- 
cent are held up at assembly beca use we're waiting for those parts 
to arrive before we can build and ship."  
Captured by Plamen T.
177
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"So it's obvious those parts get first priority," I explain to the 
two supervisors. 
Then Ralph says, "We went ahead and made a list for both 
heat-treat and the NCX-10 as to which parts they each have to 
process and in what order—again, the same sequence of latest 
order to least late. In a day or two we can generate the list by 
computer and stop burning the midnight oil." 
"Fantastic, Ralph. I think bot h you and Stacey have done a 
super job," I tell him. Then I tu rn to Ted and Mario. "Now, all 
you gentlemen have to do is have your foremen start at the top of 
the list and work their way down." 
"That sounds easy enough," says  Ted. "I think we can han- 
dle that." 
"You know, we may have to go track some of these down," 
says Mario. 
"So you'll have to do some digging through the inventory," 
says Stacey. "What's the problem?" 
Mario frowns and says, "No problem. You just want us to do 
what's on this list, right?" 
"Yep, it's that simple," I say. "I don't want to see either of 
you working on something not on t hat list. If the expediters give 
you any problem, tell them to come see me. And be sure you stick 
to the sequence we've given you." 
Ted and Mario both nod. 
I turn to Stacey and say, "You do understand how important 
it is for the expediters not to interfere with this priority list, don't 
you?" 
Stacey says, "Okay, but you have to promise me you won't 
change it because of pressure from marketing." 
"My word of honor," I tell her. Then I say to Ted and Mario, 
"In all seriousness, I hope you two guys know that heat-treat and 
the NCX-10 are the most important processes in the whole plant. 
How well you manage those two could very well determine 
whether this plant has a future." 
"We'll do our best," says Ted. 
"I can assure you that they will," says Bob Donovan. 
Right after that meeting, I go down the hall to the personnel 
relations for a meeting with Mike O'Donnell, the union local 
president. When I walk in, my personnel manager, Scott Dolin, is 
Captured by Plamen T.
178
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementgripping the armrests of his chair with white knuckles, while 
O'Donnell is talking at the top of his voice. 
"What's the problem here?" I ask. 
"You know very well what the problem is: your new lunch 
rules in heat-treat and n/c machining," says O'Donnell. "They're 
in violation of the contract. I refer you to Section Seven, Para- 
graph Four . . ." 
I  s a y ,  " O k a y ,  w a i t  a  m i n u t e ,  M i k e .  I t ' s  t i m e  w e  g a v e  t h e  
union an update on the si tuation of the plant." 
For the rest of the morning I describe for him the situation 
the plant is in. Then I tell him so me of what we've discovered and 
explain why the changes are necessary. 
Wrapping up, I say, "You understand, don't you, that it's 
probably only going to affect abou t twenty people at the most?" 
He shakes his head. 
"Look, I appreciate you trying to explain all this," he says. 
"But we got a contract. Now if we look the other way on one 
thing, what's to say you won't start changing whatever else you 
don't like?" 
I say, "Mike, in all honesty, I can't tell you that down the 
road aways, we won't need to make other changes. But we're 
ultimately talking about jobs. I'm not asking for cuts in wages or 
concessions on benefits. But I am asking for flexibility. We have 
to have the leeway necessary to make changes that will allow the 
plant to make money. Or, very simply, there may not be a plant 
in a few months." 
"Sounds like scare tactics to me," he says finally. 
"Mike, all I can say is, if you w ant to wait a couple of months 
to see if I'm just trying to sc are everyone, it'll be too late." 
O'Donnell is quiet for a moment. 
Finally, he says, "I'll have to thin k about it, talk it over and all 
that. We'll get back to you." 
By early afternoon, I can't stand  it anymore. I'm anxious to 
find out how the new priority system is working. I try calling Bob 
Donovan, but he's out in the plant.  S o  I  d e c i d e  t o  g o  h a v e  a  l o o k  
for myself. 
The first place I check is the NCX-10. But when I get to the 
machine, there's nobody to ask. Being an automated machine, it 
runs a lot of the time with nobody tending it. The problem is that 
when I walk up, the damn thing is just sitting there. It isn't run- 
ning and nobody is doing a set-up. I get mad.  
Captured by Plamen T.
179
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementI go find Mario. 
"Why the hell isn't that machine working?" I ask him. 
He checks with the foreman. Fi nally he walks back to me. 
"We don't have the materials," he says. 
"What do you mean, you don't have materials," I shout. "What 
do you call these stacks of steel everywhere?" 
"But you told us to work according to what's on the list," says 
Mario. 
"You mean you finished all the late parts?" 
"No, they did the first two batches of parts," says Mario. 
"When they got to the third part on the list, they looked all 
around and couldn't find the materials for it in the queue. So 
we're shut down until they turn up." 
I'm ready to strangle him. 
"That's what you wanted us to do, right?" says Mario. "You 
w a n t e d  u s  t o  d o  o n l y  w h a t  w a s  o n  t h e  l i s t  a n d  i n  t h e  s a m e  o r d e r  
as listed, didn't you? Isn't that what you said?" 
Finally I say, "Yes, that is what  I said. But didn't it occur to 
you that if you couldn't do one item on the list you should go on 
to the next?" 
Mario looks helpless. 
"Well, where the hell are the ma terials you need?" I ask him. 
"I have no idea," he says. "Th ey could be any of half-a-dozen 
places. But I think Bob Donovan might have somebody looking 
for them already." 
"Okay, look," I tell him. "You have the setup people get this 
machine ready for whatever is the next part on that list for which 
you do have the materials. And k eep this hunk of junk running." 
"Yes sir," says Mario. 
Fuming mad, I start back to the office to have Donovan 
paged, so I can find out what we nt wrong. Halfway there, I pass 
some lathes and there he is, talking to Otto the foreman. I don't 
know how civil the tone is. Otto appears to be dismayed by Bob's 
presence. I stop and stand there waiting for Bob to finish and 
notice me. Which happens directly. Otto walks over and calls his 
machinists together. Bo b comes over to me. 
I say, "You know about what's going on—" 
"Yes, I know," he says. "That's why I'm here." 
"What's the problem?" 
"Nothing, no problem," he says. "Just standard operating 
procedure." 
Captured by Plamen T.
180
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementIt turns out, as Bob explains to me, that the parts they were 
waiting for at the NCX-10 have been sitting there for about a 
week. Otto has been running other batches of parts. He didn't 
know about the importance of the parts destined for the NCX-10. 
To him they looked like any other batch—and a rather unimpor- 
tant one judging from the size. When Bob got here, they were in 
the middle of a big, long run. Otto didn't want to stop . . . until 
Donovan explained it to him, that is. 
"Dammit, Al, it's just like befo re," Bob says. "They get set up 
and they start running one thing, and then they have to break in 
the middle so we can finish something else. It's the same damn 
thing!" 
"Now hold on," I say. "Let's think about this for a second." 
Bob shakes his head. "What is there to think about?" 
"Let's just try to reason this  through," I say. "What was the 
problem?" 
"The parts didn't arrive at the NCX-10, which meant the 
operators couldn't run the batch they were supposed to be run- 
ning," says Bob in kind of a sing-song way. 
"And the cause was that the bottleneck parts were held up by 
this non-bottleneck machine running non-bottleneck parts," I 
say. "Now we've got to ask ou rselves why that happened." 
"The guy in charge here was just trying to stay busy, that's 
all," says Bob. 
"Right. Because if he didn't stay busy, someone like you 
would come along and jump all over him," I say. 
"Yeah, and if I didn't, then someone like you would jump all 
over me," says Bob. 
"Okay, granted. But even th ough this guy was busy, he 
wasn't helping to move to ward the goal," I say. 
"Well . . ." 
"He wasn't, Bob! Look," I say. I point to the parts destined 
for the NCX-10. "We need those parts now, not tomorrow. The 
non-bottleneck parts we may not need for weeks, or even months 
—maybe never. So by continuing  to run the non-bottleneck parts, 
this guy was actually interfering with our ability to get an order 
out the door and make money." 
"But he didn't know any better," says Bob. 
"Exactly. He couldn't distinguish between an important 
batch of parts and an unimporta nt one," I say. "Why not?" 
"Nobody told him."  
Captured by Plamen T.
181
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Until you came along," I say. "But you can't be everywhere, 
and this same kind of thing is go ing to happen again. So how do 
we communicate to everybody in  the plant which parts are im- 
portant?" 
"I guess we need some kind  of system," says Bob. 
"Fine. Let's go work on one right away so we don't have to 
keep putting up with this crap," I say. "And before we do any- 
thing else, let's make sure that people at both of the bottlenecks 
know to keep working on the order with the highest priority 
number on the list." 
Bob has a final chat with Otto to make sure he knows what to 
do with the parts. Then the two of us head for the bottlenecks. 
Finally we're walking back to the office. Glancing at Bob's 
face, I can tell he's still bot hered by what happened. 
"What's wrong? You look unconv inced about all this," I say. 
"Al, what's going to happen if we repeatedly have people 
break up process runs to run par ts for the bottlenecks?" he asks. 
"We should be able to avoid idle time on the bottlenecks," I 
say. 
"But what's going to happen to our costs on the other 98 
percent of the work centers  we got here?" he asks. 
"Right now, don't worry about it . Let's just keep the bottle- 
necks busy," I say. "Look, I'm  convinced you did the right thing 
back there. Aren't you?" 
"Maybe I did the right thing," he says, "but I had to break all 
the rules to do it." 
"Then the rules had to be brok en," I say. "And maybe they 
weren't good rules to begin with. You know we've always had to 
break up process runs for expedien cy to get orders shipped. The 
difference between then and now is that now we know to do it 
ahead of time, before the external  pressure comes. We've got to 
have faith in what we know." 
Bob nods in agreement. But I know he'll only believe the 
proof. Maybe I'm  the same, if I'm honest about it. 
A few days pass while we develop a system to cure the prob- 
lem. But at eight o'clock on Friday morning, at the beginning of 
first shift, I'm  in the cafeteria watching the employees wander in. 
With me is Bob Donovan. 
After our earlier misunderstanding, I decided that the more 
people who know about the bottl enecks and how important they 
are, the better off we'll be. We're holding fifteen-minute meetings 
Captured by Plamen T.
182
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementwith everyone working in the plant, both foremen and hourly 
people. This afternoon, we'll do the same thing with people 
working second shift, and I'll come  in late tonight to talk to the 
third shift as well. When we've go t everybody this morning, I get 
up in front of them and talk. 
"All of you know that this plant has been in a downward slide 
for some time. What you don't know is that we're in the position 
to begin to change that," I tell them. "You're here in this meeting 
because we're introducing a new system today ... a system 
which we think will make the plan t more productive than it's 
been in the past. In the next fe w minutes, I'm going to explain 
briefly some of the background that made us develop this new 
system. And then Bob Donovan is going to tell you how it works." 
Trying to keep meetings to fi fteen minutes doesn't give us 
the time to tell them very much. But using the analogy of an 
hourglass, I do explain briefly about the bottlenecks and why we 
have to give priority to parts on the heat-treat and NCX-10 rout- 
ings. For the things I can't take ti me to tell them, there is going to 
be a newsletter, which will repla ce the old plant employee paper, 
and which will report developments  and progress in the plant. 
Anyway, I turn over the microphone to Donovan and he tells 
them how we're going to prioritize  all materials in the plant so 
everybody knows what to work on. 
"By the end of today, all work-i n-process on the floor will be 
marked by a tag with a number on it," he says and holds up some 
samples. "The tag will be one of two colors: red or green. 
"A red marker means the work a ttached to it has first prior- 
ity. The red tags go on any materi als needing to be processed by a 
bottleneck. When a batch of parts with that color marker arrives 
at your work station, you are to work on them right away." 
Bob explains what we mean by "right away." If the employee 
is working on a different job, it's ok ay to finish what he's doing, as 
long as it doesn't take more than half an hour. Before an hour 
has passed, certainly, the red-tagged parts should be getting at- 
tention. 
"If you are in the middle of a setup, break the setup immedi- 
ately and get ready for the red parts. When you've finished the 
bottleneck parts, you can go back to  what you were doing before. 
"The second color is green. When there is a choice between 
working on parts with a red marker and parts with a green 
marker, you work on the parts with the red marker first. So far, 
Captured by Plamen T.
183
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementmost of the work-in-process out there will be marked by green. 
Even so, you work on green orders  only if you don't have any red 
ones in queue. 
"That explains the priority of the colors. But what happens 
when you've got two batches of th e same color? Each tag will have 
a number marked on it. You should always work on the materials 
with the lowest number." 
Donovan explains some of the details and answers a couple 
of questions, after which I wrap it up. 
I tell them, "This meeting was my  idea. I decided to take you 
away from your jobs, mostly because I wanted everyone to hear 
the same message at the same time, so that—I hope—you'll have 
a better understanding of what's going on. But another reason is 
that I know it's been a long time since most of you have heard any 
good news about the plant. What  you've just heard about is a 
beginning. Even so, the future of this plant and the security of 
your jobs will only be assured when we start making money 
again. The most important thing yo u  c a n  d o  i s  t o  w o r k  w i t h  u s  
. . . and, together, we'll all be working to keep this plant work- 
ing." 
Late that afternoon,  my phone rings. 
"Hi, this is O'Donnell. Go ahead with the new policy on 
lunch and coffee breaks. We won't challenge it." 
I relay the news to Donovan. And with these small victories, 
the week ends. 
At 7:29 on Saturday evening, I park the washed, waxed, 
buffed and vacuumed Mazda in the Barnett driveway. I reach for 
the bouquet of flowers beside me on the seat, and step out onto 
the lawn wearing my new courting duds. At 7:30, I ring the door- 
bell. 
Julie opens the door. 
"Well, don't you look nice," she says. 
"So do you," I tell her. 
And she does. 
There are a few stiff minutes sp ent talking with her parents. 
Mr. Barnett asks how everything is going at the plant. I tell him it 
looks like we may be on our way to a recovery, and mention the 
new priority system and what it will do for the NCX-10 and heat- 
treat. Both of her parents look at me blankly.  
Captured by Plamen T.
184
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Shall we go?" suggests Julie. 
Joking, I tell Julie's mother, "I'll have her home by ten 
o'clock." 
"Good," says Mrs. Barnett. "We'll be waiting."  
Captured by Plamen T.
185
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement22 
"There you have it," says Ralph. 
"Not bad," says Stacey. 
"Not bad? It's a lot better than not bad," says Bob. 
"We must be doing someth ing right," says Stacey. 
"Yeah, but it isn't enough," I mutter. 
A week has passed. We're grouped around a computer ter- 
minal in the conference room. Ralp h has extracted from the com- 
puter a list of overdue orders that we shipped last week. 
"Isn't enough? At least it's progress," says Stacey. "We 
shipped twelve orders last week. For this plant, that's not bad. 
And they were our twelve most overdue orders." 
"By the way, our worst overdue order is now only forty four 
days late," says Ralph. "As you may recall, the worst one used to 
be fifty eight days." 
"All right!" says Donovan. 
I step back to the table and sit down. 
Their enthusiasm is somewhat justified. The new system of 
tagging all the batches according to priority and routing has been 
working fairly well. The bottl enecks are getting their parts 
promptly. In fact, the piles of inventory in front of them have 
grown. Following bottleneck processing, the red-tagged parts 
have been getting to final assembly faster. It's as if we've created 
an "express lane" through the plant for bottleneck parts. 
After putting Q.C. in front of the bottlenecks, we discovered 
that about five percent of the parts going into the NCX-10 and 
about seven percent going into heat-treat did not conform to 
quality requirements. If those percentages hold true in the fu- 
ture, we'll effectively have gained that time for additional 
throughput. 
The new policy of having peop le cover the bottlenecks on 
lunch breaks has also gone into effect. We're not sure how much 
we've gained from that, because we didn't know how much we 
were losing before. At least we'r e doing the right thing now. But I 
have heard reports that from time to time the NCX-10 is idle— 
and it happens when there is nobody on break. Donovan is sup- 
posed to be looking into the causes.  
Captured by Plamen T.
186
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementThe combination of these has a llowed us to ship our most 
critical orders and to ship a few more of them than normal. But I 
know we're not going fast enough. A few weeks ago we were 
limping along; now we're walking, but we ought to be jogging. 
Glancing back toward the monitor, I see the eyes are upon 
me. 
"Listen ... I know we've taken a step in the right direc- 
tion," I explain. "But we have to accelerate the progress. It's 
good that we got twelve shipment s out last week. But we're still 
having some customer orders become past due. It's not as many, 
I'll grant you, but we still have to do better. We really shouldn't 
have any late orders." 
Everyone walks away from the computer and joins me around 
the table. Bob Donovan starts te lling me how they're planning 
some refinements on what we've already done. 
I say, "Bob, those are fine, but they're minor. How are we 
coming on the other suggestions Jonah made?" 
Bob glances away. 
"Well . . . we're looking into them," he says. 
I say, "I want recommendations on offloading the bottle- 
necks ready for our Wednesday staff meeting." 
Bob nods, but says nothing. 
"You'll have them for us?" I ask. 
"Whatever it takes," he says. 
That afternoon in my office, I have a meeting with Elroy 
Langston, our Q.C. manager, and Barbara Penn, who handles 
employee communications. Barbara writes the newsletters, which 
are now explaining the backgrou nd and reasons for the changes 
taking place in the plant. Last week, we distributed the first issue. 
I put her together with Langston to have her work on a new 
project. 
After parts exit the bottlenecks, they often tend to look al- 
most identical to the parts going into the bottlenecks. Only a close 
examination by a trained eye will detect the difference in some 
cases. The problem is how to make it easy for the employee to tell 
the two apart . . . and to make it possible for the employee to 
treat the post-bottleneck parts so more of them make it to assem- 
bly and are shipped as quality products. Langston and Penn are 
in my office to talk about what they've come up with. 
"We already have the red tags," says Penn. "So that tells us 
Captured by Plamen T.
187
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementthe part is on a bottleneck routing. What we need is a simple way 
to show people the parts they need to treat with special attention 
—the ones they need to treat like gold." 
"That's a suitable comparison," I tell her. 
She says, "So what if we simply mark the tags with pieces of 
yellow tape after the parts are finished by the bottlenecks. The 
tape would tell people on sight that these are the parts you treat 
like gold. In conjunction with this, I'll do an internal promotion 
to spread the word about what the tape means. For media, we 
might use some sort of bulletin board poster, an announcement 
that the foremen would read to the hourly people, maybe a ban- 
ner which would hang in the plant—those kinds of things." 
"As long as the tape can be added without slowing down the 
bottlenecks, that sounds fine," I say. 
" I ' m  s u r e  w e  c a n  f i n d  a  w a y  t o  d o  i t  s o  i t  d o e s n ' t  i n t e r f e r e , "  
says Langston. 
"Good," I say. "One other concern of mine is that I don't 
want this to be just a lot of promotion." 
"That's perfectly understood," says Langston with a smile. 
"Right now, we're systematically identifying the causes of quality 
problems on the bottlenecks and in subsequent processing. Once 
we know where to aim, we'll be having specific procedures devel- 
oped for bottleneck-routed parts and processes. And once they're 
established, we'll set up training sessions so people can learn 
those procedures. But that's obviously going to take some time. 
For the short term, we're specifying that the existing procedures 
be double-checked for accuracy on the bottleneck routes." 
We talk that over for a few minutes, but basically all of it 
seems sound to me. I tell them to  proceed full speed and to keep 
me informed of what's happening. 
"Nice job," I say to both of them as they stand up to leave. 
"By the way, Roy, I thought Bo b Donovan was going to sit in on 
this meeting." 
"That man is hard to catch these days," says Langston. "But 
I'll brief him on what we talked about." 
Just then, the phone rings. Reaching with one hand to an- 
swer it, I wave to Langston and Penn with the other as they walk 
out the door. 
"Hi, this is Donovan." 
"It's too late to call in sick," I tell him. "Don't you know you 
just missed a meeting?"  
Captured by Plamen T.
188
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementThat doesn't faze him. 
"Al, have I got something to sh ow you!" says Bob. "Got time 
to take a little walk?" 
"Yeah, I guess so. What's this all about?" 
"Well . . . I'll tell you when yo u get here," says Bob. "Meet 
me on the receiving dock." 
I walk down to the dock, where I see Bob; he's standing 
there waving to me as if I might miss him. Which would be im- 
possible. There is a flat-bed truc k backed up to the dock, and in 
the middle of the bed is a large object on a skid. The object is 
covered by a gray canvas tarp which has ropes tying it down. A 
couple of guys are working with an overhead crane to move the 
thing off of the truck. They're rais ing it into the air as I walk up 
to Bob. He cups his hands around his mouth. 
"Easy there," Bob calls as he watches the big gray thing sway 
back and forth. 
Slowly, the crane maneuvers the cargo back from the truck 
and lowers it safely to the concrete floor. The workers release the 
hoist chains. Bob walks over and has them untie the ropes hold- 
ing down the canvas. 
"We'll have it off in a mi nute," Bob assures me. 
I stand there patiently, but Bob can't refrain from helping. 
When all the ropes are untied, Donovan takes hold of the tarp 
and, with a flair of gusto, flings it off of what it's concealing. 
"Ta-da!" he says as he stands back and gestures to what has 
to be one of the oldest pieces of equipment I've ever seen. 
"What the hell is it?" I ask. 
"It's a Zmegma," he says. 
He takes a rag and wipes off some of the grime. 
"They don't build 'em like this anymore," he says. 
"I'm very glad to hear that," I say. 
"Al," he says, "the Zmegma is  just the machine we need!" 
"That looks like it might have been state-of-the-art for 1942. 
How's it going to help us?" 
"Well ... I admit it ain't no match for the NCX-10. But if 
you take this baby right here," he says patting the Zmegma, "and 
one of those Screwmeisters over there," he says pointing across 
the way, "and that other machine off in the corner, together they 
can do all the things the NCX-10 can do." 
I glance around at the different machines. All of them are 
old and idle. I step closer to the Zmegma to look it over. 
Captured by Plamen T.
189
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"So this must be one of the machines you told Jonah we sold 
to make way for the invent ory holding pen," I say. 
"You got it," he says. 
"It's practically an antique. All of them are," I say, referring 
to the other machines. "Are you sure they can give us acceptable 
quality?" 
"It isn't automated equipment, so with human error we 
might have a few more mistakes,"  s a y s  B o b .  " B u t  i f  y o u  w a n t  
capacity, this is a quick way to get it." 
I smile. "It's looking better and better. Where did you find 
this thing?" 
"I called a buddy of mine this  morning up at our South End 
plant," he says. "He told me he still had a couple of these sitting 
around and he'd have no problem parting with one of them. So I 
grabbed a guy from maintenance and we took a ride up to have a 
look." 
I ask him, "What did it cost us?" 
"The rental fee on the truck to haul it down here," says Bob. 
"The guy at South End told us just to go ahead and take it. He'll 
write it off as scrap. With all th e paperwork he'd have to do, it 
was too much trouble to sell it to us." 
"Does it still work?" 
"It did before we left," says Bob. "Let's find out." 
The maintenance man connects the power cable to an outlet 
on a nearby steel column. Bob reaches for the power switch and 
hits the ON button. For a second, nothing happens. Then we 
hear the slow, gathering whirr from somewhere in the guts of the 
old machine. Poofs of dust blow out of the antique fan housing. 
Bob turns to me with a du mb grin on his big face. 
"Guess we're in business," he says.  
Captured by Plamen T.
190
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement23 
Rain is beating at the window s of my office. Outside, the 
world is gray and blurred. It's the middle of a middle-of-the-week 
morning. In front of me are some so-called "Productivity Bulle- 
tins" put out by Hilton Smyth which I've come across in my in- 
basket. I haven't been able to make myself read past the first 
paragraph of the one on top. Inst e a d ,  I ' m  g a z i n g  a t  t h e  r a i n  a n d  
pondering the situation with my wife. 
Julie and I went out on our "dat e" that Saturday night, and 
we actually had a good time. It was nothing exotic. We went to a 
movie, we got a bite to eat afterwards, and for the heck of it we 
took a drive through the park on the way home. Very tame. But it 
was exactly what we needed. It was good just to relax with her. I 
admit that at first I felt kind of like we were back in high school or 
something. But, after a while, I decided that wasn't such a bad 
feeling. I brought her back to he r parents at two in the morning, 
and we made out in the driveway until her old man turned on 
the porch light. 
Since that night, we've continue d to see each other. A couple 
of times last week, I made the drive up to see her. Once, we met 
halfway at a restaurant. I've been dragging myself to work in the 
morning, but with no compla ints. We've had fun together. 
By some unspoken agreement, neither of us talk about di- 
vorce or marriage. The subject has only come up once, which 
happened when we talked about the kids and agreed they should 
stay with Julie and her folks as s oon as school ends. I tried then to 
push us into some answers, but the old argument syndrome be- 
gan to brew quickly, and I backed  off to preserve the peace. 
It's a strange state of limbo we're in. It almost feels the way it 
did before we got married and "settled down." Only now, we're 
both quite familiar to each other. And there is this storm which 
has gone south for a while, but whic h is sure to swing back some- 
day. 
A soft tap at the door interrupts this meditation. I see Fran's 
face peeking around the edge of the door. 
"Ted Spencer is outside," she says. "He says he needs to talk 
to you about something."  
Captured by Plamen T.
191
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"What about?" 
Fran steps into the office and closes the door behind her. She 
quickly comes over to my desk and whispers to me. 
"I don't know, but I heard on the grapevine that he had an 
argument with Ralph Nakamura about an hour ago," she says. 
"Oh," I say. "Okay, thanks for the warning. Send him in." 
A moment later Ted Spencer comes in. He looks mad. I ask 
him what's happening down in heat-treat. 
He says, "Al, you've got to get that computer guy off my 
back." 
"You mean Ralph? What have you got against him?" 
"He's trying to turn me into some kind of clerk or some- 
thing," says Ted. "He's been comi ng around and asking all kinds 
of dumb questions. Now he wants me to keep some kind of spe- 
cial records on what happens in heat-treat." 
"What kind of records?" I ask. 
"I don't know ... he wants me to keep a detailed log of 
everything that goes in and out of the furnaces . . . the times we 
put 'em in, the times we take 'em out, how much time between 
heats, all that stuff," says Ted. "A nd I've got too much to do to be 
bothered with all that. In addition to heat-treat, I've got three 
other work centers I'm responsible for." 
"Why does he want this time log?" I ask. 
"How should I know? I mean, we've already got enough 
paperwork to satisfy anybody, as far as I'm concerned," says Ted. 
"I think Ralph just wants to play games with numbers. If he's got 
the time for it, then fine, let him do it in his own department. I've 
got the productivity of my department to worry about." 
Wanting to end this, I nod to him. "Okay, I hear you. Let me 
look into it." 
"Will you keep him out of my area?" asks Ted. 
"I'll let you know, Ted." 
After he's gone, I have Fran tr ack down Ralph Nakamura for 
me. What's puzzling me is that Ralph is not what you'd call an 
abrasive person, and yet he sure seems to have made Ted very 
upset. 
"You wanted to see me?" asks Ralph from the door. 
"Yeah, come on in and si t down," I say to him. 
He seats himself in front of my desk.  
Captured by Plamen T.
192
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"So tell me what you did to light Ted Spencer's fuse," I say to 
him. 
Ralph rolls his eyes and says, "All I wanted from him was to 
keep an accurate record of the actual times for each heat of parts 
in the furnace. I thought it was a simple enough request." 
"What prompted you to ask him?" 
"I had a couple of reasons," says  Ralph. "One of them is that 
the data we have on heat-treat seem s to be very inaccurate. And if 
what you say is true, that this operation is so vital to the plant, 
then it seems to me we ought to  have valid statistics on it." 
"What makes you think our data is so inaccurate?" I ask. 
"Because after I saw the total on last week's shipments I was 
kind of bothered by something. A few days ago on my own, I did 
some projections of how many shipments we would actually be 
able to make last week based on the output of parts from the 
bottlenecks. According to those pr ojections, we should have been 
able to do about eighteen to twenty shipments instead of twelve. 
The projections were so far off th at I figured at first I must have 
made a big mistake. So I took a closer look, double-checked my 
math and couldn't find anything wrong. Then I saw that the 
estimates for the NCX-10 were wi thin the ballpark. But for heat- 
treat, there was a big difference." 
"And that's what made you thin k that the data base must be 
in error," I say. 
"Right," he says. "So I went down to talk to Spencer. And, 
ah. . . ." 
"And what?" 
"Well, I noticed some funny things were happening," he 
says. "He was kind of tight-lipped when I started asking him 
questions. Finally, I just happened to ask him when the parts that 
were being treated in the furnace at the moment were going to be 
finished. I thought I'd get a time on an actual heat by myself, just 
to see if we were close to the standard. He said the parts could 
come out at around 3 P.M. So I went away, and came back at 
three. But nobody was around. I waited for about ten minutes, 
then went to look for Ted. When I found him, he said he had the 
furnace helpers working somewhere else and they'd get around 
to unloading the furnace in a little while. I didn't think much 
about it. Then around 5:30, as I was leaving for the day, I de- 
cided I'd go by the furnace to ask what time the parts had actually 
come out. But the same parts were still in there."  
Captured by Plamen T.
193
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Two-and-a-half hours after they c ould have come out, they 
hadn't been unloaded?" I ask. 
"That's right," says Ralph. "So I found Sammy, the second- 
shift foreman down there, and asked him what was going on. He 
told me he was short-handed that night, and they'd get to it later. 
H e  s a i d  i t  d i d n ' t  h u r t  t h e  p a r t s  t o  s t a y  i n  t h e  f u r n a c e .  W h i l e  I  w a s  
there, he shut off the burners, bu t I found out later that the parts 
didn't come out until about eight o'clock. I didn't mean to start 
trouble, but I'd thought if we r ecorded the actual times per heat, 
we'd at least have some realistic figures to use for estimating. You 
see, I asked some of the hourly people down there and they told 
me those kinds of delays ha ppen a lot in heat-treat." 
"No kidding," I say. "Ralph ... I want you to take all the 
measurements down there that yo u need. Don't worry about Ted. 
And do the same thing on the NCX-10." 
"Well, I'd like to, but it's kind  of a chore," he says. "That's 
why I wanted Ted and the others just to jot down the times and 
all." 
I say, "Okay, we'll take care of that. And, ah ... thanks 
very much." 
"You're welcome," he says. 
"By the way, what was the ot her reason?" I ask him. "You 
mentioned you had more than one." 
"Oh, well, it's probably not that important." 
"No, tell me," I say. 
"I don't really know if we can do  it or not," says Ralph, "but 
i t  o c c u r r e d  t o  m e  w e  m i g h t  f i n d  a way to use the bottlenecks to 
predict when we'll be able to ship an order." 
I contemplate that possibility. 
"Sounds interesting," I tell him. "Let me know what you 
come up with." 
Bob Donovan's ears are on fire by the time I've finished tell- 
ing him what Ralph discovered about heat-treat on his own. I'm 
very upset about this. He's sitting in a chair in my office while I 
walk in circles in front of him. 
But when I'm done, Bob tells me, "Al, the trouble is there is 
nothing for the guys down there to do while heat-treat is cookin' 
the parts. You load up one of the damn furnaces, shut the doors, 
and that's it for six or eight hours, or however long it takes. What 
Captured by Plamen T.
194
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementare  they  supposed  to  do?   Stand  around  and  twiddle  their 
thumbs?" 
"I don't care what they do between times as long as they get 
the parts in and out of the furnace pronto," I say. "We could have 
done almost another batch of parts in the five hours of waiting for 
people to finish what they were doing elsewhere and change 
loads." 
"All right," says Bob. "How about this: we loan the people to 
other areas while the parts cook, but a s  s o o n  a s  t h e  t i m e  i s  u p ,  w e  
make sure we call them back immediately so—" 
"No, because what's going to happen is everybody will be 
very conscientious about it for two days, and then it'll slip back to 
the way it is now," I say. "I want people at those furnaces stand- 
ing by, ready to load and unload twenty-four hours a day, seven 
days a week. The first ones I want assigned there are foremen 
who are responsible full-time for what happens down there. And 
tell Ted Spencer that the next ti me I see him, he'd better know 
what's going on in heat-treat or I'll kick his ass." 
"You bet," says Bob. "But you know you're talking about 
two, maybe three people per shift." 
"Is that all?" I ask. "Don't you remember what lost time on a 
bottleneck costs us?" 
"Okay, I'm with you," he says. "Tell you the truth, what 
Ralph found out about heat-treat is a lot like what I found out on 
my own about those rumors of idle time on the NCX-10." 
"What's going on there?" 
Bob tells me that, indeed, it's true the NCX-10 is sitting idle 
for as much as half an hour or more at a time. But the problem is 
not lunch breaks. If the NCX-10 is being set up and lunch time 
rolls around, the two guys stay until the setup is completed. Or, if 
the setup is a long one, they spell each other, so one goes and eats 
while the other continues with the setup. We're covered fine dur- 
ing breaks. But if the machine stops, say, in the middle of the 
afternoon, it may sit there for twenty, thirty, forty minutes or so 
before anyone gets around to st arting a new setup. The reason is 
the setup people are busy with other machines, with non-bottle- 
necks. 
"Then let's do the same thing on the NCX-10 as I want to do 
on heat-treat," I tell Bob. "Let's get a machinist and a helper and 
have them permanently stationed at the NCX-10. When it stops, 
they can get to work on it immediately."  
Captured by Plamen T.
195
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"That's just dandy with me," says Bob. "But you know how 
it's going to look on paper. It's going to seem like we increased 
the direct labor content of the par ts coming out of heat-treat and 
the NCX-10." 
I slump into the chair behind my desk. 
"Let's fight one battle at a time," I say. 
The next morning, Bob comes to  the staff meeting with his 
recommendations. They basically cons ist of four actions. The first 
two concern what he and I talked about the day before—dedicat- 
ing a machinist and helper to th e NCX-10, and stationing a fore- 
man and two workers at the heat-treat furnaces. The assignments 
would apply to all three shifts. The other two recommendations 
concern offloading the bottlenecks. Bob has determined if we 
could activate one each of thes e old machines—the Zmegma and 
the two others—just one shift a day, we could add eighteen per- 
cent to the output of parts of the type produced by the NCX-10. 
Last of all, is that we take some of the parts queued at heat-treat 
and send them out to the vendor across town. 
As he's presenting these, I'm wondering what Lou is going to 
say. As it happens, Lou offers little resistance. 
"Knowing what we know now," sa ys Lou, "it's perfectly legit- 
imate for us to assign people to the bottlenecks if it will increase 
our throughput. We can certainly ju stify the cost if it increases 
sales—and thereby increases cash flow. My question is, where are 
you going to get the people?" 
Bob says we could call them back from layoff. 
"No, you can't. See, the problem we have," says Lou, "is that 
the division has a recall freeze in effect. We can't recall without 
their approval." 
"Do we have people in the plan t who can do these jobs?" asks 
Stacey. 
"You mean steal people from  other areas?" asks Bob. 
"Sure," I say. "Take people from the non-bottlenecks. By 
definition, they have excess capacity anyway." 
Bob thinks about it for a minute. Then he explains that find- 
ing helpers for heat-treat is no big deal. And we do have some old 
machinists, who haven't been laid off because of seniority, who 
are qualified to run the Zmegma and the other two machines. 
Establishing a two-person set-up crew on the NCX-10, however, 
has him worried.  
Captured by Plamen T.
196
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Who's going to set up the other machines?" he asks. 
"The helpers on the other machines know enough to set up 
their own equipment," I say. 
"Well, I guess we can try it," says Bob. "But what happens if 
stealing people turns non-bo ttlenecks into bottlenecks?" 
I tell him, "The important thing is to maintain the flow. If we 
take a worker away, and we can't maintain the flow, then we'll put 
the worker back and steal a body from someplace else. And if we 
still can't keep the flow going, th en we'll have no choice but to go 
to a division and insist that we either go to overtime or call a few 
people back from layoff." 
"Okay," says Bob. "I'll go for it." 
Lou gives us his blessing. 
"Good. Let's do it," I say. "A nd, Bob, make sure the people 
you pick are good. From now on, we put only our best people to 
work on the bottlenecks." 
And so it is done. 
The NCX-10 gets a dedicated setup crew. The Zmegma and 
the other machines go to work. Th e outfit across town is only too 
glad to take our surplus parts fo r heat-treating. And in our own 
heat-treat department, two people per shift are assigned to stand 
by, ready to load and unload par ts from the furnaces. Donovan 
juggles the work-center responsibilities so heat-treat has a fore- 
man there at all times. 
For a foreman, heat-treat seems like a very small kingdom, 
not much of a prize. There is nothing intrinsically attractive about 
running that operation, and hav ing only two people to manage 
makes it seem like no big deal. To prevent it from seeming like a 
demotion to them, I make a point to go down there periodically 
on each of the shifts. In talking to the foreman, I drop some 
rather direct hints that the rewards will be great for anyone who 
can improve the output of heat-treated parts. 
Shortly thereafter, some amazing things happen. Very early 
one morning, I'm down there at the end of third shift. A young 
guy named Mike Haley is the foreman. He's a big black man 
whose arms always look as thou gh they're going to burst the 
sleeves on his shirts. We've noticed that over the past week he's 
pushed about ten percent more parts through heat-treat on his 
shift than the others have. Records are not usually set on third 
shift, and we're starting to wonder  if it's Mike's biceps that are 
Captured by Plamen T.
197
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementdoing the trick. Anyway, I go down there to try to learn what he's 
doing. 
As I walk up, I see the two helpers are not just standing 
around with nothing to do. They're moving parts. In front of the 
furnaces are two tightly organize d stacks of work-in-process, 
which the helpers are building. I call Mike over and ask him what 
they're doing. 
"They're getting ready," he says. 
"What do you mean?" 
"They're getting ready for when we have to load one of the 
furnaces again," he says. "The parts in each stack are all treated 
at the same temperature." 
"So you're splitting and overlapping some batches," I say. 
"Sure," he says. "I know we're not really supposed to do 
that, but you need the parts, right?" 
"Sure, no problem. You're still doing the treating according 
to the priority system?" I ask. 
"Oh, yeah," he says. "Come here. Let me show you." 
Mike leads me past the control console for the furnaces to a 
worn old battleship of a desk. He finds the computer print-out 
for the week's most important overdue orders. 
"See, look at number 22," he says pointing to it. "We need 
fifty of the high stress RB-dash-11's. They get treated at a 1200- 
degree temperature cycle. But fifty of them won't fill up the fur- 
nace. So we look down and what do we see here but item number 
31, which calls for 300 fitted reta ining rings. Those also take a 
1200-degree cycle." 
"So you'll fill up the furnace wi th as many of the retaining 
rings after you've loaded the fi fty of the first item," I say. 
"Yeah, that's it," says Mike. "Only we do the sorting and 
stacking in advance so we can load the furnace faster." 
"That's good thinking," I tell him. 
"Well, we could do even better if I could get someone to 
listen to an idea I got," he says. 
"What do you have in mind?" 
"Well, right now, it takes anywhere up to an hour or so to 
change a furnace load using the crane or doing it by hand. We 
could cut that down to a couple of minutes if we had a better 
system." He points to the furnaces. "Each one of those has a table 
which the parts sit on. They slide in and out on rollers. If we 
could get some steel plate and ma ybe a little help from engineer- 
Captured by Plamen T.
198
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementing, we could make those tables interchangeable. That way we 
could stack a load of parts in advance and switch loads with the 
use of a forklift. If it saves us a couple of hours a day, that means 
we can do an extra heat of part s over the course of a week." 
I look from the furnaces back to Mike. I say, "Mike, I want 
you to take tomorrow night off. We'll get one of the other fore- 
men to cover for you." 
"Sounds good to me," he says  with a grin. "How come?" 
"Because the day after tomorrow, I want you on day turn. 
I'm going to have Bob Donovan put you together with an I.E. to 
write up these procedures forma lly, so we can start using them 
round the clock," I tell him. "You keep that mind of yours work- 
ing. We need it." 
Later that morning, Donova n happens by my office. 
"Hi, there," he says. 
"Well, hello," I tell him. "Did you get my note on Haley?" 
"It's being taken care of," says Bob. 
"Good. And let's make sure he gets some more money out of 
this whenever the wage freeze is lifted," I say. 
"Okay," says Bob as a smile spre ads across his face. Then he 
leans against the doorway. 
"Something else?" I ask. 
"Got good news for you," says Bob. 
"How good?" 
"Remember when Jonah asked us if all the parts going 
through heat-treat really needed it?" 
I tell him I remember. 
"I just found out that in three cases, it wasn't engineering 
that specified heat-treat. It was us," says Bob. 
"What do you mean?" 
He explains that about five years ago some group of hot- 
shots were trying to improve the efficiencies of several of the 
machining centers. To speed up the processing, the cutting tool 
"bite" was increased. So on each pass, instead of shaving a chip 
that was a millimeter thick, the tool took off three millimeters. 
But increasing the amount of me tal taken off on each pass made 
the metal brittle. And this necessitated heat-treating. 
"The thing is, the machines we made more efficient happen 
to be non-bottlenecks," says Bob.  "We have enough capacity on 
them to slow down and still meet demand. And if we go back to 
Captured by Plamen T.
199
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementthe slower processing, we don't need the heat-treat . Which means 
we can take about twenty percent of the current load off the 
furnaces." 
"Sounds fantastic," I tell him. "What about getting it ap- 
proved by engineering?" 
"That's the beauty of it," says Bob. "We were the ones who 
initiated the change five years ago." 
"So if it was our option to begi n with," I say, "we can change 
it back any time we want." 
"Right! We don't need to get an engineering change order, 
because we already have an approved procedure on the books," 
says Bob. 
He leaves shortly with my blessing to implement the change 
as soon as possible. I sit there marveling that we're going to reduce 
the efficiency of some operations and make the entire plant more 
productive. They'd never believe it on the fifteenth floor. 
Captured by Plamen T.
200
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement24 
It's a Friday afternoon. Out in the parking lot, the people on 
first shift are getting into their ca rs to go home. There is the usual 
congestion at the gate. I'm in my office—minding my own busi- 
ness—when suddenly, from through the half-open door . . . 
BAM! 
Something ricochets off the ceiling tiles. I jump to my feet, 
check myself for wounds and, find ing none, search the carpet for 
the offending missile. It's a champagne cork. 
There is laughing outside my door. In the next instant, it 
seems as though everyone is in my office. There is Stacey, Bob 
Donovan (who holds the bottle from which the cork came), 
Ralph, Fran, a couple of the secretaries, and a swarm of other 
people—even Lou joins us. Fran hands me one of the styrofoam 
coffee cups she's dispensing to everyone. Bob fills it from the 
bottle. 
"What's this all about?" I ask. 
"I'll tell you in the toast I'm g° ing to make as soon as every- 
one has something to swallow," says Bob. 
More bottles are opened—there is a case of this stuff—and 
when all the cups are filled, Bob lifts his own. 
"Here's to a new plant record in shipments of product," he 
says. "Lou went through the records for us and discovered that 
until now the best this place has ever done in a month was thirty- 
one orders shipped at value of about two million dollars. This 
month we topped that. We shipped fifty-seven customer orders 
with a value of ... well, in roun d numbers, we'll call it a cool 
three million." 
"Not only did we ship more product," says Stacey, "but, hav- 
ing just calculated our inventory levels, I am pleased to report 
that between last month and now, we've had a twelve percent net 
decline in work-in-process inventory." 
"Well, then, let's drink to making money!" I say. 
And we do. 
"Mmmmm . . . industrial strength champagne," says 
Stacey. 
"Very distinctive," says Ralph to  Bob. "Did you pick this out 
yourself?" 
Captured by Plamen T.
201
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Keep drinking. It gets better," says Donovan. 
I'm just about to hazard a sec ond cup when I notice Fran 
beside me. 
"Mr. Rogo?" 
"Yes." 
"Bill Peach is on the line," says Fran. 
I shake my head wondering what the hell it's going to be this 
time. 
"I'll take it at your desk, Fran." 
I go out there and punch the blinking button on my phone 
and pick it up. 
"Yes, Bill, what can I do for you?" 
"I was just talking to Johnny Jons," says Peach. 
I automatically grab a pencil and  pull over a pad of paper to 
take down the particulars on whatever order is causing us grief. I 
wait for Peach to continue, but he doesn't say anything for a 
second. 
"What's the problem?" I ask him. 
"No problem," says Peach. "Actually he was very happy." 
"Really? What about?" 
"He mentioned you've been coming through lately for him 
on a lot of late customer orders," says Peach. "Some kind of spe- 
cial effort I guess." 
"Well, yes and no. We're doing a few things a little differently 
now," I say. 
"Well, whatever. The reason I ca lled is I know how I'm al- 
ways on your case when things go  wrong, Al, so I just wanted to 
tell you thanks from me and Jons for doing something right," 
says Peach. 
"Thanks, Bill," I tell hi m. "Thanks for calling." 
"Thankyouthankyouthankyouthankyouthankyou," I'm blith- 
ering to Stacey as she parks her car in my driveway. "You are a 
truly wonderful person for driving me home . . . and I truly 
meant that truly." 
"Don't mention it," she says. "I'm glad we had something to 
celebrate." 
She shuts off the engine. I look up at my house, which is 
dark except for one light. I had th e good sense earlier to call my 
mother and tell her not to hold dinner for me. That was smart 
because the celebration continued onward and outward after 
Captured by Plamen T.
202
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementPeach's call. About half of the original group went to dinner to- 
gether. Lou and Ralph threw in the towel early. But Donovan, 
Stacey and I—along with three or  four die-hards—went to a bar 
after we ate and we had a good time. Now it is 1:30 and I am 
blissfully stinko. 
The Mazda for safety's sake, it still parked behind the bar. 
Stacey, who switched to club so da a couple of hours ago, has 
generously played chauffeur to  Bob and me. About ten minutes 
ago, we nudged Donovan through his kitchen door where he 
stood there bewildered for a moment before bidding us a good 
evening. If he remembers, Donovan is supposed to enlist his wife 
later today to drive us over to the bar and retrieve our vehicles. 
Stacey gets out of the car and  comes around and opens my 
door so I can spill myself onto the driveway. Standing up on 
uncertain legs, I steady myself against the car. 
"I've never seen you smile so much," says Stacey. 
"I've got a lot to smile about," I tell her. 
"Wish you could be this happy in staff meetings," she says. 
"Henceforth, I shall smile continuously through all staff 
meetings," I proclaim. 
"Come on, I'll make sure you get to the door," she says. 
With her hands around my arm to steady me, she guides me 
up the front walk to the door. 
When we're at the door, I ask her, "How about some cof- 
fee?" 
"No, thanks," she says. "It's late and I'd better get home." 
"Sure?" 
"Absolutely." 
I fumble with the keys, find the lock, and the door swings 
open to a dark living room. I turn  to Stacey and extend my hand. 
"Thank you for a wonderful ev ening," I tell her. "I had a 
swell time." 
Then as we're shaking hands, I for some reason step back- 
wards, trip over the doorstep  and lose all my balance. 
"Woops!" 
The next thing I know Sta cey and I are sprawled on the 
floor together. Fortunately—or ma ybe not as it turns out—Stacey 
thinks this is colossally funny. Sh e's laughing so hard, tears start 
to roll down her cheeks. And so I start laughing too. Both of us 
are rolling on the floor with laughter—when the lights come on. 
"You bastard!"  
Captured by Plamen T.
203
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementI look up, my eyes adjusting to the sudden light, and there 
she is. 
"Julie? What are you doing here?" 
Without answering, she's now stomping through the kitchen. 
A s  I  g e t  t o  m y  f e e t  a n d  s t a g g e r  a f ter her, the door to the garage 
opens. The light switch in the garage  clicks. I see her in silhouette 
for half a second. 
"Julie! Wait a minute!" 
I hear the garage door rumbling open as I attempt to follow 
her. As I go into the garage, sh e's already getting into her car. 
The door slams. I zig-zag closer, wildly waving my arms. The 
engine starts. 
"I sit here waiting for you all night, putting up with your 
mother for six hours," she yells through the rolled-down window, 
"and you come home drun k with some floozy!" 
"But Stacey isn't a floozy, she's—" 
Accelerating to about thirty miles per hours in reverse, Julie 
backs out of the garage, down the driveway (narrowly missing 
Stacey's car) and into the street. I'm left standing there in the 
light of the garage. The tires of her car chirp upon the asphalt. 
She's gone. 
On Saturday morning, I wake up and groan a couple of 
times. The first groan is from the hangover. The second groan is 
from the memory of what happened. 
When I'm able, I get dressed and venture into the kitchen in 
quest of coffee. My mother is there. 
"You know your wife was here la st night," says my mother as 
I pour my first cup. 
So then I find out what happene d. Julie showed up just after 
I called here last night. She had driven over on impulse, because 
she had missed me and she had wanted to see the kids. She ap- 
parently wanted to surprise me, which she did. 
Later, I call the Barnett's numb er. Ada gives me the routine 
of "She doesn't want to talk to you anymore." 
When I get to the plant on Monday, Fran tells me Stacey has 
been looking for me since she arri ved this morning. I have just 
settled in behind my desk wh en Stacey appears at the door. 
"Hi. Can we talk?" she asks.  
Captured by Plamen T.
204
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Sure. Come on in," I say. 
She seems disturbed about some thing. She's avoiding my 
eyes as she sits down. 
I say, "Listen, about Friday ni ght, I'm sorry about what hap- 
pened when you dropped me off." 
Stacey says, "It's okay. Did your wife come back?" 
"Uh, well, no, she didn't. She's staying with her parents for a 
little while," I say. 
"Was it just because of me?" she asks. 
"No, we've been having some problems lately." 
"Al, I still feel kind of responsible," she says. "Look, why 
don't I talk to her." 
"No, you don't have to  do that," I say. 
"Really, I think I ought to talk to her," says Stacey. "What's 
her number?" 
I finally admit to myself it might be worth a try. So I give the 
Barnett's number to Stacey. She writes it down, and promises to 
call sometime today. Then sh e continues to sit there. 
"Was there something else?" I ask. 
"I'm afraid there is," she says. 
She pauses. 
"So what is it?" 
"I don't think you're going to like this," she says. "But I'm 
pretty sure about it ..." 
"Stacey," I say. "What?"  
"The bottlenecks have spread." 
"What do you mean 'the bottlenecks have spread'?" I ask. "Is 
there a disease out there or something?" 
"No, what I mean is we ha ve a new bottleneck—or maybe 
even more than one; I'm not su re yet. Here, let me show you," 
she says as she comes around th e side of the desk with some 
computer print-outs she's brought.  "These are listings of parts 
that are queued up at final assembly." 
She goes over the lists with me. As always, the bottleneck 
parts are still in short supply. But lately there have been 
shortages of some non -bottleneck parts as well. 
She says, "Last week we had a case in which we had to build 
an order for 200 DBD-50's. Out of  172 different parts, we were 
missing 17. Only one of them was a red-tagged part. The rest 
were green tags. The red part came out of heat-treat on Thurs- 
Captured by Plamen T.
205
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementday and was ready by Friday morning. But the others are still 
missing." 
I lean back in my chair and pinch the bridge of my nose. 
"Dammit, what the hell is going on out there? I had assumed 
the parts that have to go through a bottleneck would reach as- 
sembly last. Is there a materials shortage on those green-tagged 
parts? Some kind of vendor problem?" I ask her. 
Stacey shakes her head. "No, I haven't had any problems 
with purchasing. And none of the parts have any processing by 
outside contractors. The problem is definitely internal. That's 
why I really think we have one  or more new bottlenecks." 
I get up from my desk, walk around the office. 
"Maybe with the increase in throughput, we've loaded the 
plant to a level that we've run out of capacity on some other 
resources in addition to heat-tre at and the NCX-10," Stacey sug- 
gests quietly. 
I nod. Yes, that sounds like a possibility. With the bottlenecks 
more productive now, our throughput has gone up and our 
backlog is declining. But making the bottlenecks more productive 
has put more demand on the other work centers. If the demand 
on another work center has gone above one hundred percent, 
then we've created a new bottleneck. 
Of the ceiling, I ask, "Does this  mean we're going to have to 
go through the whole process of finding the bottlenecks all over 
again? Just when it seemed like we were on our way out of this 
mess. . . ." 
Stacey folds the print-outs. 
I tell her, "Okay, look, I want you to find out everything you 
can—exactly which parts, how many, what products are affected, 
which routings they're on, how often they're missing, all that 
stuff. Meanwhile, I'm going to try to get hold of Jonah to see what 
he has to say about all this." 
After Stacey leaves, and Fran does the calling to locate Jonah. 
I stand by the window in my offi ce and stare at the lawn while I 
think. I took it as a good sign that inventory levels had declined 
after we implemented the new me asures to make the bottleneck- 
more productive. A month ago we were wading through parts on 
the non-bottleneck routings. There were piles and piles, and the 
piles kept growing. But some of the stocks have dwindled over 
the past couple of weeks of product assembly. Last week, for the 
first time since I've been at this  plant, you could actually walk 
Captured by Plamen T.
206
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementover to the assembly line without having to turn sideways to 
squeeze between the stacks and bins of inventory. I thought it was 
good. But now this happens. 
"Mr. Rogo," says Fran through the intercom speaker. "I've 
got him on the line." 
I pick up the phone. "Jonah? Hi. Listen, we've got trouble 
here." 
"What's wrong?" he asks. 
After I tell him the symptoms, Jonah asks what we've done 
since his visit. So I relate all the history to him—putting Q.C. in 
front of the bottlenecks, training people to give special care to 
bottleneck parts, activating the three machines to supplement the 
NCX-10, the new lunch rules, a ssigning certain people to work 
only at the bottlenecks, increasing the batch sizes going into heat- 
treat, implementing the new prio rity system in the plant. . . . 
"New priority system?" asks Jonah. 
"Right," I say, and then I explain about the red tags and 
green tags, and how the system works. 
Jonah says, "Maybe I'd bette r come have another look." 
I'm at home that night when the phone rings. 
"Hi," says Julie's voice when I answer. 
"Hi." 
"I owe you an apology. I'm sorry about what happened on 
Friday night," she says. "Stacey called me here. Al, I'm really 
embarrassed. I completely misunderstood." 
"Yeah, well ... it seems to me there's a lot of misunder- 
standing between us lately," I say. 
"All I can say is I'm sorry. I drove down thinking you'd be 
glad to see me." 
"I would have been if you'd stayed," I say. "In fact, if I'd 
known you were coming, I would have come home after work." 
"I know I should have called," she says, "but I was just in one 
of those moods." 
"I guess you shouldn't have waited for me," I tell her. 
She says, "I just kept thinking you'd be home any minute. 
And the whole time, your mother kept giving me the evil eye. 
Finally she and the kids went to  bed, and about an hour later I 
fell asleep on the sofa and slept until you came in." 
"Well . . . you want to be friends again?" 
Captured by Plamen T.
207
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementI can hear her relief. 
"Yes, I would," she says. "When will I see you?" 
I suggest we try Friday all over again. She says she can't wait 
that long. We compromise on Wednesday.  
Captured by Plamen T.
208
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement25 
Deja vu. At the airport next mo rning, I again greet Jonah as 
he walks out of Gate Two. 
By ten o'clock, we're in the conference room at the plant. 
Sitting around the table are Lou,  Bob, Ralph and Stacey. Jonah 
paces in front of us. 
"Let's start with some basic questions," he says. "First of all, 
have you determined exactly which parts are giving you the 
problem?" 
Stacey, who is sitting at the table with a veritable fortress of 
paper around her and looking as if  she's ready for a siege, holds 
up a list. 
She says, "Yes, we've identified  them. In fact, I spent last 
night tracking them down and double checking the data with 
what's on the floor out there. Turns out the problem covers thirty 
parts." 
Jonah asks, "Are you sure you released the materials for 
them?" 
"Oh, yes," says Stacey. "No problem there. They've been 
released according to schedule. But they're not reaching final 
assembly. They're stuck in front of our new bottleneck." 
"Wait a minute. How do you know it's really a bottleneck?" 
asks Jonah. 
She says, "Well, since the parts are held up, I just figured it 
had to be . . ." 
"Before we jump to conclusions, let's invest half an hour to 
go into the plant so we can find out what's happening," Jonah 
says. 
So we parade into the plant, and a few minutes later we're 
standing in front of a group of milling machines. Off to one side 
are big stacks of inventory marked with green tags. Stacey stands 
there and points out the parts that  are needed in final assembly. 
Most of the missing parts are right here and all bear green tags. 
Bob calls over the foreman, a heft y guy by the name of Jake, and 
introduces him to Jonah. 
"Yeah, all them parts been sitti n' here for about two, three 
weeks or more," says Jake.  
Captured by Plamen T.
209
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"But we need them now," I say. "How come they're not 
being worked on?" 
Jake shrugs his shoulders. "You know which ones you want, 
we'll do 'em right now. But that goes against them rules you set 
up in that there priority system." 
He points to some other skids of materials nearby. 
"You see over there?" says Jake. "They all got red tags. We 
got to do all of 'em before we touch the stuff with green tags. 
That's what you told us, right?" 
Uh-huh. It's becoming clear what's been happening. 
"You mean," says Stacey, "that while the materials with 
green tags have been building up, you've been spending all your 
time on the parts boun d for the bottlenecks." 
"Yeah, well, most of it," says Jake. "Hey, like we only got so 
many hours in a day, you know what I mean?" 
"How much of your work is on bottleneck parts?" asks Jo- 
nah. 
"Maybe seventy-five or eighty percent," says Jake. "See, ev- 
erything that goes to heat-treat or the NCX-10 has to pass 
through here first. As long as the red parts keep coming—and 
they haven't let up one bit since that new system started—we just 
don't have the time to work on very  many of the green-tag parts." 
There is a moment of silence. I look from the parts to the 
machines and back to Jake again. 
"What the hell do we do now?" asks Donovan in echo to my 
own thoughts. "Do we switch tags? Make the missing parts red 
instead of green?" 
I throw up my hands in frustrat ion and say, "I guess the only 
solution is to expedite." 
"No, actually, that is not the solution at all," Jonah says, "be- 
cause if you resort to expediting  now, you'll have to expedite all 
the time, and the situation will only get worse." 
"But what else can we do?" asks Stacey. 
Jonah says, "First, I want us to  go look at the bottlenecks, 
because there is another aspect to the problem." 
Before we can see the NCX-10, we see the inventory. It's 
stacked as high as the biggest forklift can reach. It's not just a 
mountain, but a mountain with many peaks. The piles here are 
even bigger than before we iden tified the machine as a bottle- 
neck. And tied to every bin, hang ing from every pallet of parts is 
Captured by Plamen T.
210
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementa red" tag. Somewhere behind it all, its own hugeness obscur ed 
from our view, is the NCX-10. 
"How do we get there from here?" asks Ralph, looking for a 
path through the inventory. 
"Here, let me show you," says Bob. 
And he leads us through the maze of materials until we reach 
the machine. 
Gazing at all the work-in-pro cess around us, Jonah says to 
us, "You know, I would guess, just from looking at it, that you 
have at least a month or more of work lined-up here for this 
machine. And I bet if we went to heat-treat we would find the 
same situation. Tell me, do you know why you have such a huge 
pile of inventory here?" 
"Because everyone ahead of this machine is giving first pri- 
ority to red parts," I suggest. 
"Yes, that's part of the reason," says Jonah. "But why is so 
much inventory coming through the plant to get stuck here?" 
Nobody answers. 
"Okay, I see I'm going to have to explain some of the basic 
relationships between bottlenecks and non-bottlenecks," says Jo- 
nah. Then he looks at me and says, "By the way, do you remem- 
ber when I told you that a plant in which everyone is working all 
the time is very in efficient? Now you'll see exactly what I was 
talking about." 
Jonah walks over to the nearby Q.C. station and takes a piece 
of chalk the inspectors use to mark defects on the parts they 
reject. He kneels down to the concrete floor and points to the 
NCX-10. 
"Here is your bottleneck," he says, "the X-what-ever-it-is ma- 
chine. We'll simply call it 'X.' " 
He writes an X on the floor. Then he gestures to the other 
machines back down the aisle. 
"And feeding parts to X are various non-bottleneck ma- 
chines and workers," he says. "Because we designated the bottle- 
neck as X, we'll refer to these non-bottlenecks as 'Y' resources. 
Now, for the sake of simplicity, let's just consider one non-bottle- 
neck in combination with  one bottleneck . . ." 
With the chalk, he writes on the floor: 
Y —> X  
Captured by Plamen T.
211
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementProduct parts are what join th e two in a relationship with 
each other, Jonah explains, and the arrow obviously indicates the 
flow of parts from one to the other. He adds that we can consider 
any non-bottleneck feeding parts to  X, because no matter which 
one we choose, its inventory must be processed at some subse- 
quent point in time by X. 
"By the definition of a non-bottleneck, we know that Y has 
extra capacity. Because of its extra capacity, we also know that Y 
will be faster in filling the demand than X," says Jonah. "Let's say 
both X and Y have 600 hours a mo nth available for production. 
Because it is a bottleneck, you will need all 600 hours of the X 
machine to meet demand. But let' s say you need only 450 hours a 
month, or 75 percent, of Y to keep the flow equal to demand. 
What happens when Y has worked its 450 hours? Do you let it sit 
idle?" 
Bob says, "No, we'll find something else for it to do." 
"But Y has already satisfied market demand," says Jonah. 
Bob says, "Well, then we let it get a head start on next 
month's work." 
"And if there is nothing for it to work on?" asks Jonah. 
Bob says, "Then we'll have to release more materials." 
"And that is the problem," says Jonah. "Because what hap- 
pens to those extra hours of production from Y? Well, that inven- 
tory has to go somewhere. Y is faster than X. And by keeping Y 
active, the flow of parts to X mu st be greater than the flow of 
parts leaving X. Which means . . ." 
He walks over to the work-in- process mountain and makes a 
sweeping gesture. 
"You end up with all this in fr ont of the X machine," he says. 
"And when you're pushing in more  material than the system can 
convert into throughput, what are you getting?" 
"Excess inventory," says Stacey. 
"Exactly," says Jonah. "But what about another combina- 
tion? What happens when X is feeding parts to Y?" 
Jonah writes that on the floor with the chalk like this . .  . 
X —> Y 
"How much of Y's 600 hours can be used productively 
here?" asks Jonah. 
"Only 450 hours again," says Stacey.  
Captured by Plamen T.
212
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"That's right," says Jonah. "If Y is depending exclusively 
upon X to feed it inventory, the maximum number of hours it 
can work is determined by the ou tput of X. And 600 hours from 
X equates to 450 hours for Y. Af ter working those hours, Y will 
be starved for inventory to proce ss. Which, by the way, is quite 
acceptable." 
"Wait a minute," I say. "We have bottlenecks feeding non- 
bottlenecks here in the plant. Fo r instance, whatever leaves the 
NCX-10 will be processed by a non-bottleneck." 
"From other non-bottlenecks yo u mean. And do you know 
what happens when you keep Y active that way?" asks Jonah. 
"Look at this." 
He draws a third diagram on the floor with the chalk. 
In this case, Jonah explains, some parts do not flow through 
a bottleneck; their processing is  done only by a non-bottleneck 
and the flow is directly from Y to assembly. The other parts do 
flow through a bottleneck, and they are on the X route to assem- 
bly where they are mated to the Y parts into a finished product. 
In a real situation, the Y route probably would consist of one 
non-bottleneck feeding another non-bottleneck, feeding yet an- 
other non-bottleneck, and so on, to final assembly. The X route 
might have a series of non-botjtlenecks feeding a bottleneck, 
which in turn feeds a chain of more non-bottlenecks. In our case, 
Jonah says, we've got a group of  non-bottleneck machines down- 
stream from X which can process parts from either the X or the Y 
route. 
"But to keep it simple, I've diagrammed the combination 
with the fewest number of elem ents—one X and one Y. No mat- 
ter how many non-bottlenecks are in the system, the result of 
 
Captured by Plamen T.
213
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementactivating Y just to keep it busy is the same. So let's say you keep 
both X and Y working continuously for every available hour. 
How efficient would the system be?" 
"Super efficient," says Bob. 
"No, you're wrong," says Jonah. "Because what happens 
when all this inventory from  Y reaches final assembly?" 
Bob shrugs and says, "We build the orders and ship them." 
"How can you?" asks Jonah. "Eighty percent of your prod- 
ucts require at least one part from a bottleneck. What are you 
going to substitute for the bottl eneck part that hasn't shown up 
yet?" 
Bob scratches his head and says, "Oh, yeah ... I forgot." 
"So if we can't assemble," says Stacey, "we get piles of inven- 
tory again. Only this time the excess inventory doesn't accumu- 
late in front of a bottleneck; it stacks up in front of final assem- 
bly." 
"Yeah," says Lou, "and another million bucks sits still just to 
keep the wheels turning." 
And Jonah says, "You see? Once more, the non-bottleneck 
does not determine throughput, even if it works twenty-hour 
hours a day." 
Bob asks, "Okay, but what ab out that twenty percent of 
products without any bottleneck parts? We can still get high effi- 
ciencies with them." 
"You think so?" asks Jonah. 
On the floor he diagrams it like this . . . 
This time, he says, the X and Y operate independently of 
one another. They are each fillin g separate marketing demands. 
"How much of Y's 600 hours ca n the system use here?" asks 
Jonah. 
"All of 'em," says Bob. 
"Absolutely not," says Jonah. "Sure, at first glance it looks as 
if we can use one hundred percent of Y, but think again." 
"We can only use as much as the market demand can ab- 
sorb," I say. 
"Correct. By definition, Y has excess capacity," says Jonah. 
"So if you work Y to the maximum, you once again get excess 
 
Captured by Plamen T.
214
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementinventory. And this time you en d up, not with excess work-in- 
process, but with excess finished goods. The constraint here is 
not in production. The constraint is marketing's ability to sell." 
As he says this, I'm thinking to myself about the finished 
goods we've got crammed into warehouses. At least two-thirds of 
those inventories are products made entirely with non-bottleneck 
parts. By running non-bottlenecks for "efficiency," we've built 
inventories far in excess of dem and. And what about the remain- 
ing third of our finished good s? They have bottleneck parts, but 
most of those products have been sitting on the shelf now for a 
couple of years. They're obsolete. Out of 1,500 or so units in 
stock, we're lucky if we can sell ten a month. Just about all of the 
competitive products with bottleneck parts are sold virtually as 
soon as they come out of final assembly. A few of them sit in the 
warehouse a day or two before they go to the customer, but due 
to the backlog, not many. 
I look at Jonah. To the four diagrams on the floor, he has 
now added numbers so that together they look like this . . . 
Jonah says, "We've examined four linear combinations in- 
volving X and Y. Now, of course, we can create endless combina- 
tions of X and Y. But the four in front of us are fundamental 
enough that we don't have to go any further. Because if we use 
these like building blocks, we can represent any manufacturing 
situation. We don't have to look at trillions of combinations of X 
and Y to find what is universally t r u e  i n  a l l  o f  t h e m ;  w e  c a n  
generalize the truth simply by identifying what happens in each 
of these four cases. Can you tell me what you have noticed to be 
similar in all of them?" 
Stacey points out immediately t hat in no case does Y ever 
determine throughput for the syst em. Whenever it's possible to 
 
Captured by Plamen T.
215
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementactivate Y above the level of X, doing so results only in excess 
inventory, not in greater throughput. 
"Yes, and if we follow that thought to a logical conclusion," 
says Jonah, "we can form a simple rule which will be true in every 
case: the level of utilization of a non-bottleneck is not determined 
by its own potential, but by some other constraint in the system." 
He points to the NCX-10. 
"A major constraint here in your system is this machine," 
says Jonah. "When you make a non-bottleneck do more work 
than this machine, you are not increasing productivity. On the 
contrary, you are doing exactly the opposite. You are creating 
excess inventory, which is against the goal." 
"But what are we supposed to do?" asks Bob. "If we don't 
keep our people working, we'll have idle time, and idle time will 
lower our efficiencies." 
"So what?" asks Jonah. 
Donovan is taken aback. "Beg  pardon, but how the hell can 
you say that?" 
"Just take a look behind you," sa ys Jonah. "Take a look at the 
monster you've made. It did not create itself. You have created 
this mountain of inventory with your own decisions. And why? 
Because of the wrong assumption that you must make the work- 
ers produce one hundred percent of  the time, or else get rid of 
them to 'save' money." 
Lou says, "Well, granted that maybe one hundred percent is 
unrealistic. We just ask for some acceptable percentage, say, 
ninety percent." 
"Why is ninety percent acceptable?" asks Jonah. "Why not 
sixty percent, or twenty-five? The numbers are meaningless un- 
less they are based upon the constraints of the system. With 
enough raw materials, you can k eep one worker busy from now 
until retirement. But should you do it? Not if you want to make 
money." 
Then Ralph suggests, "What you're  saying is that making an 
employee work and profiting from  that work are two different 
things." 
"Yes, and that's a very clos e approximation of the second 
rule we can logically derive from the four combinations of X and 
Y we talked about," says Jonah. "P utting it precisely, activating a 
resource and utilizing a resource are not synonymous." 
He explains that in both rules, "utilizing" a resource means 
Captured by Plamen T.
216
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementmaking use of the resource in a wa y that moves the system toward 
the goal. "Activating" a resource is like pressing the ON switch of 
a machine; it runs whether or not there is any benefit to be de- 
rived from the work it's doing. So, really, activating a non-bottle- 
neck to its maximum is an act of maximum stupidity. 
"And the implication of these rules is that we must not seek to 
optimize every resource in the system," says Jonah. "A system of 
local optimums is not an optimum syst em at all; it is a very ineffi- 
cient system." 
"Okay," I say, "but how does knowing this help us get the 
missing parts unstuck at the millin g machines and moved to final 
assembly?" 
Jonah says, "Think about the build-up of inventory both 
here and at your milling machines in terms of these two rules we 
just talked about." 
"I think I see the cause of the problem," Stacey says, "We're 
releasing material faster than the bottlenecks can process it." 
"Yes," says Jonah. "You are sending work onto the floor 
whenever non-bottlenecks are running out of work to do." 
I say, "Granted, but the milling machines are a bottleneck." 
Jonah shakes his head and says, "No, they are not—as evi- 
denced by all this excess inventor y behind you. You see, the mill- 
ing machines are not intrinsically a bottleneck. You have turned 
them into one." 
He tells us that with an increa se in throughput, it is possible 
to create new bottlenecks. But most plants have so much extra 
capacity that it takes an enormous increase in throughput before 
this happens. We've only had a twenty percent increase. When I 
had talked to him by phone, he thought it unlikely a new bottle- 
neck would have occurred. 
What happened was that even as throughput increased, we 
continued loading the plant with inventory as if we expected to 
keep all our workers fully activated. This increased the load 
dumped upon the milling machines and pushed them beyond 
their capacity. The first-priori ty, red-tagged parts were pro- 
cessed, but the green-tagged parts piled up. So not only did we 
get excess inventory at the NCX-10 and at heat-treat, but due to 
the volume of bottleneck parts, we  clogged the flow at another 
work center and prevented non-bot tleneck parts from reaching 
assembly. 
When he's finished, I say, "All right, I see now the error of 
Captured by Plamen T.
217
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementour ways . Can you tell us what we should do to correct the prob- 
lem?" 
"I want you all to think about i t  a s  w e  w a l k  b a c k  t o  y o u r  
conference room and then we'll ta lk about what you should do," 
says Jonah. "The solution is fairly simple."  
Captured by Plamen T.
218
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement26 
Just how simple the solution is doesn't become apparent to 
me until I'm home that night. I'm sitting at the kitchen table with 
a pad of paper and a pencil thin king about what was suggested 
today when Sharon comes in. 
"Hi," she says as she sits down. 
"Hi," I say back. "What's up?" 
"Not much," she says. "Just wondered what you were do- 
ing." 
"I'm working," I tell her. 
"Can I help?" she asks. 
"Well ... I don't know," I say. "It's kind of technical. I 
think you'll probably be bored by it." 
"Oh," she says. "Does that mean you want me to leave?" 
Guilt strikes. 
"No, not if you want to stay," I tell her. "Do you want to try 
to solve a problem?" 
"Okay," she says, brightening. 
I say, "All right. Let me think of  how to put this to you. Do 
you know about the scout hike Dave and I were on?" 
"She doesn't, but I do!" says Dave, racing into the kitchen. 
He skids to a stop on the smooth floor and says, "Sharon doesn't 
know anything about the hi ke. But I can help you." 
I say, "Son, I think there is a career for you in sales." 
Sharon indignantly says, "Yes, I do know about the hike." 
"You weren't even there," says Dave. 
"I've heard everybody talk about it," she says. 
"Okay, both of you can work on this," I say. "Here's the prob- 
lem: We've got a line of kids on a hike in the woods. In the 
middle of the line, we've got Herbie. We've already taken the 
pack off Herbie's back to help him go faster, but he's still the 
slowest. Everybody wants to go fa ster than Herbie. But if that 
happens, the line will spread out and some of the kids will get 
lost. For one reason or another, we can't move Herbie from the 
middle of the line. Now, how do we keep the line from spread- 
ing?" 
They both become thoughtful.  
Captured by Plamen T.
219
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementI say, "All right, now both of you go into the other room. I'll 
give you ten minutes, and then we'll see which one of you comes 
up with the best idea to keep everyone together in the line." 
"What does the winner get?" asks Dave. 
"Well .  .  . anything within reason." 
"Anything?" asks Sharon. 
"Within reason," I repeat. 
So they leave and I get about ten minutes of peace and quiet. 
Then I see the two faces looking around the corner. 
"Ready?" I ask. 
They come in and sit down at  the kitchen table with me. 
"Want to hear my idea?" asks Sharon. 
"My idea is better," says Dave. 
"It is not!" she tells him. 
"Okay, enough!" I say. "What's your idea, Sharon?" 
Sharon says, "A drummer." 
"Pardon me?" 
"You know .  . . like in a parade," she says. 
"Oh, I know what you mean," I say, realizing what she has in 
mind. "There aren't any gaps in a parade. Everybody is marching 
in step." 
Sharon beams. Dave gives her a dirty look. 
"So everybody's marching in step ... to a beat," I say, 
thinking out loud. "Sure. But how do you keep the people in 
front of Herbie from setting a faster pace?" 
"You have Herbie beat the drum," says Sharon. 
I think about it and say, "Yeah, that's not bad." 
"But my idea is better," says Dave. 
I turn to him. "Okay, wise  guy, what's your idea?" 
"Tie ropes to everyone," says Dave. 
"Ropes?" 
"You know, like mountain climbers," he says. "You tie every- 
one together at the waist with one long rope. So, that way, no one 
could get left behind, and nobody could speed up without every- 
body speeding up." 
I say, "Hmmm . . . that's very good." 
It would mean that the line—which would translate to the 
total inventory in the plant—could never be longer than the 
rope. And the rope, of course, could be of a pre-determined 
length, which means we could control it with precision. Everyone 
Captured by Plamen T.
220
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementw o u l d  h a v e  t o  w a l k  a t  t h e  s a m e  s p e e d . I look at Dave, a little in 
awe of his creativity. 
"Come to think of it, the r ope makes it sound like having 
physical links between all the equipment," I tell him, "which is 
like an assembly line." 
"Yeah, an assembly line," says Dave. "Didn't you tell me once 
that an assembly line is supposed to be the best way to make 
things?" 
"Well, yes, it's the most effici ent way to manufacture," I say. 
"In fact, we use that approach wh en we do the final assembly for 
most of our products. The problem is that an assembly line won't 
work throughout the whole plant." 
"Oh," says Dave. 
"But those are both good idea s you two thought up," I tell 
them. "In fact, if we changed each  of your ideas just a little bit 
we'd almost have the solution suggested to us today." 
"Like how?" asks Sharon. 
"See, to keep the line from spreading, it actually wouldn't be 
necessary to keep everyone marching to exactly the same step or 
to keep everyone tied to the rope," I tell them. "What we really 
h a v e  t o  d o  i s  j u s t  k e e p  t h e  k i d  at the front of the line from walk- 
ing faster than Herbie. If we can do that, then everybody will stay 
together." 
"So we just tie the rope from Herbie to the kid at the front," 
says Dave. 
"Or, maybe Herbie and the boy at the front of the line have 
signals," says Sharon. "When the boy in front goes too fast, 
Herbie tells him to wait or slow down." 
"That's right," I say. "Both of you figured it out." 
"So what do we both win?" asks Sharon. 
"What do you want?" I ask. "A pizza with everything? A 
night at the movies?" 
They're quiet for a moment. 
"The movies sound good," says Sharon, "but what I'd really 
like is if you could get Mom to come home again." 
Now it gets very quiet. 
Dave says finally, "But if you can't, we'll understand." 
"Well, I'm doing my best," I say. "Meanwhile, how about the 
movies?" 
After the kids have gone to bed, I sit up wondering for the 
hundredth time whether Julie will come back. Compared with 
Captured by Plamen T.
221
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementmy marital difficulties, the inventory problem at the plant seems 
simple—or at least it seems simple now. I guess every problem is 
easy once you've figured it out. 
We are, in effect, going to do what my two kids came up with. 
The Herbies (the bottlenecks) are going to tell us when to let 
more inventory into the system —except we're going to use the 
aid of computers instead of drums and ropes. 
After we returned to the confer ence room in the office build- 
ing today, we started talking, and we all agreed that we're obvi- 
ously releasing too much material. We don't need five or six 
weeks of inventory in front of the bottleneck to keep it produc- 
tive. 
"If we can withhold materials for red parts, instead of push- 
ing them out there as soon as th e first non-bottleneck has nothing 
to do," said Stacey, "the milling machines will then have time to 
work on the green parts. And th e parts we're missing will reach 
assembly with no problem." 
Jonah nodded and said, "That's right. What you have to do 
is find a way to release the materi al for the red parts according to 
the rate at which the bottlenecks need material—and strictly at 
that rate." 
Then I said, "Fine, but how do we time each release of mate- 
rial so it arrives at the bot tleneck when it's needed?" 
Stacey said, "I'm not sure, but I see what you're worried 
about. We don't want the opposite problem of no work in front of 
the bottleneck." 
"Hell, we got at least a month before that happens, even if 
we released no more red tags from today on," said Bob. "But I 
know what you mean. If we idle the bottleneck, we lose 
throughput." 
"What we need," I said, "is some kind of signal to link the 
bottlenecks with the release-of-materials schedule." 
Then Ralph, to my surprise, spoke up and said, "Excuse me, 
this is just a thought. But mayb e we can predict when to release 
material by some kind of system based on the data we've kept on 
both the bottlenecks." 
I asked him what he was getting at. 
He said, "Well, since we starte d keeping data on the bottle- 
necks, I've been noticing I'm abl e to predict several weeks in 
advance what each bottleneck will be working on at a particular 
time. See, as long as I know exactly what's in queue, I just take 
Captured by Plamen T.
222
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementthe average setup and process time s for each type of part, and 
I'm able to calculate when each batch should clear the bottleneck. 
Because we're only dealing with one work center, with much less 
dependency, we can average the statistical fluctuations and get a 
better degree of accuracy." 
Ralph went on to say that he knows from observation it takes 
about two weeks, plus or minus a day or two, for material to 
reach the bottlenecks from the first operations. 
"So by adding two weeks to the setup and process times of 
what's in queue at the bottleneck," said Ralph, "I know how long 
it will take until the bottleneck is  actually working on material we 
release. And as each batch leav es the bottleneck, we can update 
our information and calculate a da te when Stacey should release 
more red-tag material." 
Jonah looked at Ralph and said, "that's excellent!" 
"Ralph," I said, "that's terrific.  How accurate do you really 
think we can be with this?" 
"I'd say we'd be accurate to within plus or minus a day," he 
said. "So if we keep, say, a three-day stock of work-in-process in 
front of each bottleneck, we should be safe." 
Everyone was telling Ralph how impressed they were when 
Jonah said, "But, in fact, Ralph, you can do much more than that 
with the same information." 
"Like what?" asked Ralph. 
Jonah said, "You can also attack the inventory problems in 
front of assembly." 
"You mean we not only can do something about excess in- 
ventory on the bottleneck parts, but on the non-bottleneck parts 
as well?" I asked. 
"Exactly," said Jonah. 
But Ralph said, "Sorry, folks, I' m not sure how I'd do that." 
Then Jonah explained it to hi m—and all of us. If Ralph can 
determine a schedule for releasing red-tag materials based on the 
bottlenecks, he can also determine a schedule for final assembly. 
Once he knows when the bottleneck  parts will reach final assem- 
bly, he can calculate backwards and determine the release of the 
non-bottleneck materials along each of their routes. In this way, 
the bottlenecks will be determining the release of all the materials 
in the plant. 
I said, "You know, that's going to produce the same effect as 
Captured by Plamen T.
223
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementmoving the bottlenecks to the head  of production, which is what 
I'd intended for us to do." 
"Yeah, it sounds good," said Ralph. "But I have to warn you, 
I can't say how long it'll take befo re I can do all that. I mean, I can 
have schedule for the red-tagged materials worked out in a fairly 
short order. The rest of it will take awhile." 
"Aw, come on, Ralphie," said Bob, "a computer wiz like you 
ought to be able to crank  that out in no time." 
"I can crank something out in no time," said Ralph, "but I'm 
not going to promise it'll work." 
I told him, "Relax; as long as we ease the load on the milling 
machines, we'll be okay for the short haul. That'll give you the 
time to get something basic in place." 
"You may feel you have the time now to relax," said Jonah, 
"but I have to catch a plane for Ch icago in thirty-five minutes." 
"Oh, shit," I muttered, automatically glancing at my watch. 
"I guess we'd better move." 
It was not a graceful parting.  Jonah and I ran out of the 
building, and I broke numerous speed limits—without incident— 
getting him to the airport. 
"I have, shall we say, a special interest in plants like yours," 
said Jonah. "So I'd appreciate it if you'd keep me informed of 
what happens." 
"Sure," I told him. "No problem. In fact, I'd planned on it." 
"Good," said Jonah. "I'll be talking to you." 
And with that he was out of the car and, with a wave, was 
sprinting through the terminal d oors. I didn't get a call, so I 
suppose he made it. 
When I go to work the next morning, we have a meeting 
about how to implement this appr oach. But before we can get 
down to talking about it, Bob Donov an starts waving a red flag at 
us. 
"You know, we could be walking into a big problem," says 
Bob. 
"What's that?" I ask. 
"What happens if efficiencies a ll over the plant go down?" he 
asks. 
I say, "Well, I think that's a risk we'll have to take."  
Captured by Plamen T.
224
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Yeah, but it sounds like we're going to have a lot of people 
idle around here if we do this," says Bob . 
"Yeah, we might have some peopl e idle from time to time," I 
admit. 
"So are we just supposed to let everyone stand around out 
there?" asks Bob. 
"Why not?" asks Stacey. "Once the somebody is already on 
the payroll, it doesn't cost us any more to have him be idle. 
Whether somebody produces parts or waits a few minutes doesn't 
increase our operating expense. But excess inventory . . . now 
that ties up a lot of money." 
"Okay," says Bob, "but what about the reporting system? 
Seems to me that at the end of the month, when old Bill Peach is 
ready to decide if we stay open or if we close down, he's not going 
to be awfully positive about us if he sees our efficiencies have 
taken a dive. I hear they do tend to frown upon that at headquar- 
ters." 
There is quiet in the room. Then Lou says, "He does have a 
point, Al." 
I listen to the hum of the air conditioning for a moment. 
"All right, look," I say finally. "If we don't go ahead with a 
system to withhold inventory and release it according to the bot- 
tlenecks, we'll be missing a major opportunity to improve perfor- 
mance and save the plant. And I'm not about to stand by and let 
that happen just to maintain a standard that obviously has more 
impact on middle management polit ics than it does on the bot- 
tom line. I say we go ahead with th is. And if efficiencies drop, let 
them." 
After those brave words, so reminiscent of Admiral Farragut 
and his Damn-the-Torpedoes speech, the others are a little misty- 
eyed. 
"And, ah, Bob," I tell Donovan, "if there is a lot of idle time 
out there, don't hassle anybody—just make damn sure it doesn't 
show up in the efficiency reports next month, okay?" 
"Gotcha, boss."  
Captured by Plamen T.
225
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement27 
". . . Let me say in conclusion that had it not been for the in- 
crease in revenue generated last month by the Bearington plant 
and its products, the UniWare Division's losses would have con- 
tinued for the seventh consecutive month. All of the other manu- 
facturing operations in the division reported only marginal gains 
in performance or sustained losses. Despite the improvement at 
Bearington and the fact that as a result the division recorded its 
first operating profit of this year, we have a long way to go before 
we are back on solid financial footing." 
Having said that, Ethan Frost gets the nod from Bill Peach 
and sits down. I'm sitting halfway down a long table where all the 
plant managers are gathered. On Peach's right is Hilton Smyth, 
who happens to be glowering at me in the aftermath of Frost's 
tribute to my plant. I relax in my chair and for a moment allow 
myself to contemplate the view through the broad plateglass win- 
dow, a sunny city on an early summer day. 
May has ended. Aside from the problem with the shortages 
of non-bottleneck parts, which have  now gone away, it's been an 
excellent month. We're now timing the release of all materials 
according to a new system Ralph Nakamura developed, which is 
keyed to the speed of the bottlenecks. He's got a data terminal 
now at both of the bottlenecks, so as inventory is processed, the 
latest information can be fed dir ectly into the plant data base. 
With the new system we're beginning to see excellent results. 
Ralph did a little experimenting with the system and soon 
discovered we can predict within a day, more or less, when a 
shipment will leave the plant. Ba sed on this, we've been able to 
put together a report to marketing listing all customer orders and 
dates when they will be shipped. (I don't know if anybody in 
marketing really believes that report, but so far it's been highly 
accurate.) 
"Rogo," says Peach, "because you seem to be the only one 
among us who has improved to any degree, we'll let you start the 
round of reports." 
I open up the cover of my report and launch into a presenta- 
tion of the highlights. By almost every standard, we've had a 
Captured by Plamen T.
226
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementgood month. Inventory levels hav e fallen and are continuing to 
fall rapidly. Withholding some materials has meant we're no 
longer choking on work-in-process. Parts are reaching the bottle- 
necks when they're supposed to, and the flow through the plant 
is much smoother than before. 
And what happened to efficiencies? Well, they did fall ini- 
tially as we began to withhold raw material from the floor, but not 
as much as we had been afraid they would—it turns out we were 
consuming excess inventory. But wi th the rate of shipments up 
dramatically, that excess has melted quickly. And now that we're 
beginning to resume releases of materials to non-bottlenecks 
again, efficiencies are on their way back up. Donovan has even 
told me confidentially he thinks the real numbers in the future 
will be almost the same as before. 
The best news is we've wiped out our backlog of overdue 
orders. Amazing as it seems, we're completely caught up. So cus- 
tomer service has improved. Throughput is up. We're on our way 
back. It's too bad the standard re port we've prepared can't begin 
to tell the full story of what's really going on. 
When I've finished, I look up the table and see Hilton Smyth 
whispering something to Bill Peach. There is quiet around the 
table for a moment. Then Bill nod s to Hilton and talks to me. 
"Good job, Al," Bill says stiffly. 
Through with me, Bill asks anot her manager to deliver his 
report. I sit back, irritated slightly that Peach wasn't more posi- 
tive, that he didn't put more praise on me the way Frost had 
indicated he should. I came in here feeling as though we'd really 
turned the plant around. And I guess I expected a little more 
than a "good job," a pat on the head. 
But then I have to remind myself that Peach doesn't know 
the extent of the change. Should he know? Should we be telling 
him? Lou has asked me about this . And I've told him, no; let's 
hold off for a while. 
We could go to Bill Peach and make a presentation to him, 
put all our cards on the table and let him decide. In fact, that's 
exactly what we will do eventu ally. But not yet. And I think I 
have a good reason. 
I've worked with Bill Peach for a lot of years; I know him 
pretty well. He's a smart man—but he is not an innovator. A 
couple of years ago, he might have let us run with this for a while. 
Not today. I have a feeling if we go to him now, he'll put on his 
Captured by Plamen T.
227
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementhard nose and tell me to run the plant by the cost accounting 
methods he believes in. 
I have to bide my time until I can go to him with a solid case 
that my way (Jonah's way, really) is the one that truly works. It's 
too early for that. We've broken too many rules to tell him the full 
story now. 
But will we have the time? That's what I keep asking myself. 
Peach hasn't voluntarily lifted th e threat to close the plant. I 
thought he might say something (pub licly or privately) after this 
report, but he hasn't. I look at him at the end of the table. He 
seems distracted, not like himself. The others talk and he seems 
only half interested. Hilton seems to cue him on what to say. 
What's with him? 
The meeting breaks up about an hour after lunch, and by 
then I've decided to have a private talk with Peach if I can get it. I 
follow him out into the corridor from the conference room and 
ask him. He invites me into his office. 
"So when are you going to let us off the hook?" I ask him 
after the door is closed. 
Bill sits down in a big upholst ered chair and I take the one 
opposite him. Without the desk between us, it's a nice little inti- 
mate chat. 
Bill looks straight at me and says, "What makes you think 
I'm going to?" 
"Bearington is on its way back ," I tell him. "We can make 
that plant make money for the division." 
"Can you?" he asks. "Look, Al , you've had a good month. 
That's a step in the right direction. But can you give us a second 
good month? And a third and fourth? That's what I'm waiting to 
see." 
"We'll give them to you," I say to him. 
"I'm going to be frank," says Peach. "I'm not yet convinced 
this hasn't been just a flash in the pan, so to speak. You had a 
huge overdue backlog. It was inevitable you'd ship it eventually. 
What have you done to reduce cost s? Nothing that I can see. It's 
going to take a ten or fifteen pe rcent reduction in operating ex- 
pense to make the plant profitable for the long term." 
I feel my heart sink. Finally, I say, "Bill, if next month we 
turn in another improvement, w ill you at least delay the recom- 
mendation to close the plant?"  
Captured by Plamen T.
228
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementHe shakes his head. "It'll have to be a bigger improvement 
than what you gave us in this past period." 
"How big?" 
"Just give me fifteen percent more on the bottom line than 
you did this month," he says. 
I nod. "I think we can do that," I say—and note the split 
second of shock blink into Peach's face. 
Then he says, "Fine. If you can deliver that, and keep deliv- 
ering it, we'll keep Bearington open." 
I smile. If I do this for you, I' m thinking, you'd be an idiot to 
close us. 
Peach stands, our chat concluded. 
I fly the Mazda up the entrance ramp to the Interstate with 
the accelerator floored and the radio turned up loud. The adren- 
alin is pumping. The thoughts in my head are racing faster than 
the car. 
Two months ago I figured I might be sending out my resume 
by now. But Peach just said if we turned in another good month 
he'd let the plant stay open. We're almost there. We just might be 
able to pull this off. Just one more month. 
But fifteen percent?  
We've been eating up our backlog of orders at a terrific rate. 
And by doing so we've been able to ship a tremendous volume of 
product—tremendous by any comparison: last month, last quar- 
ter, last year. It's given us a big surge of income, and it's looked 
fantastic on the books. But now that we've shipped all the 
overdues, and we're putting out new orders much faster than 
before. . . . 
The thought creeps up on me that I'm in really big trouble. 
Where the hell am I going to get the orders that will give me an 
extra fifteen percent? 
Peach isn't just asking for an other good month; he's de- 
manding an incredible month. He hasn't promised anything; I 
have—and probably too much. I'm trying to remember the or- 
ders scheduled for the coming weeks and attempting to calculate 
in my head if we're going to have the volume of business neces- 
sary for the bottom-line increase Peach wants to see. I have a 
scary feeling it won't be enough. 
Okay, I can ship ahead of schedule. I can take the orders 
Captured by Plamen T.
229
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementscheduled for the first week or two of July and ship them in June 
instead. 
But what am I going to do after that? I'm going to be putting 
us into a huge hole in which we have nothing else to do. We need 
more business. 
I wonder where Jonah is these days. 
Glancing down at the speedomet er, I find to my surprise 
that I'm zipping along at eighty. I slow down. I loosen my tie. No 
sense killing myself trying to get back to the plant. It occurs to 
me, in fact, that by the time I get back to the plant it'll be time to 
go home. 
Just about then, I pass a sign saying I'm two miles from the 
interchange that would put me on the highway to Forest Grove. 
Well, why not? I haven't seen Julie or  the kids in a couple of days. 
Since the end of school, the kids have been staying with Julie and 
her parents. 
I take the interchange and get off at the next exit. At a gas 
station on the corner, I make a call to the office. Fran answers and 
I tell her two things: First, pass th e word to Bob, Stacey, Ralph, 
and Lou that the meeting went well for us. And, second, I tell her 
not to expect me to co me in this afternoon. 
When I get to the Barnett's house, I get a nice welcome. I 
spend quite a while just talking to Sharon and Dave. Then Julie 
suggests we go for a walk togeth er. It's a fine summer afternoon 
outside. 
As I'm  hugging Sharon to say good bye, she whispers in my 
ear, "Daddy, when are we all going to go home together?" 
"Real soon, I hope," I tell her. 
Despite the assurance I gave her, Sharon's question doesn't 
go away. I've been wondering the same thing myself. 
Julie and I go to the park, and after walking for awhile, we sit 
down on a bench by the river. We sit without saying anything for 
a while. She asks me if someth ing is wrong. I tell her about 
Sharon's question. 
"She asks me that all the time," says Julie. 
"She does? What do you tell her?" 
Julie says, "I tell her we'll be going home real soon." 
I laugh. "That's what I said to her. Do you really mean that?" 
She's quiet for a second. Finally, she smiles at me and says 
Captured by Plamen T.
230
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementsincerely, "You've been a lot of fu n to be around in the last few 
weeks." 
"Thanks. The feeling is mutual," I say. 
She takes my hand and says, "But . . . I'm sorry, Al. I'm 
still worried about coming home." 
"Why? We're getting along a lot better now," I say, "What's 
the problem?" 
"Look, we've had some good times for a change. And that's 
fine. I've really needed this time with you," she says. "But if we 
go back to living together, you know what's going to happen 
don't you? Everything will be fine for about two days. But a week 
from now we'll be having the same arguments. And a month 
later, or six months, or a year from now . . . well, you know 
what I mean." 
I sigh. "Julie, was it t hat bad living with me?" 
"Al, it wasn't bad," she says. "It was just ... I don't know. 
You weren't paying any attention to me." 
"But I was having all kinds of problems in my job. I was 
really in over my head for aw hile. What did you expect from 
me?" 
"More than what I was getting,"  Julie says. "You know, when 
I was growing up, my father always came home from work at the 
same time. The whole family always ate together. He spent the 
evenings at home. With you, I never know what's going on." 
"You can't compare me to your father," I say. "He's a den- 
tist. After the last tooth of the day is filled, he can lock up and go 
home. My business isn't like that." 
"Alex, the problem is you are not like that," she says. "Other 
people go to work and come home at regular times." 
"Yes, you're partially right. I am not like other people," I 
admit. "When I get involved in something, I really get involved. 
And maybe that has to do with the way 7 was brought up. Look at 
my family—we hardly ever ate together. Somebody always had to 
be minding the store. It was my father's rule: the business was 
what fed us, so it came first. We  all understood that and we all 
worked together." 
"So what does that prove except our families were differ- 
ent?" she asks. "I'm telling you about something that bothered 
m e  s o  m u c h  a n d  f o r  s o  l o n g  t h a t  I  w a s n ' t  e v e n  s u r e  i f  I  l o v e d  y o u  
anymore." 
"So what makes you sure you love me now?"  
Captured by Plamen T.
231
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Do you want another fight?" she asks. 
I look the other way. 
"No, I don't want to fight," I tell her. 
I hear her sigh. Then she sa ys, "You see? Nothing has 
changed . . . has it." 
Neither of us says a word for quite awhile. Julie gets up and 
walks over to the river. It looks for a second as if she might run 
away. She doesn't. She comes ba ck again and sits down on the 
bench. 
She says to me, "When I was eighteen, I had everything 
planned—college, a teaching degree, marriage, a house, chil- 
dren. In that order. All the d ecisions were made. I knew what 
china pattern I wanted. I knew the names I wanted for the kids. I 
knew what the house should look like and what color the rug 
should be. Everything was certain. And it was so important that I 
have it all. But now ... I have it  all, only it's different somehow. 
None of it seems to matter." 
"Julie, why does your life have to conform to this . . . this 
perfect image you have in your head?" I ask her. "Do you even 
know why you want the things you do?" 
"Because that's how I grew up," she says. "And what about 
you? Why do you have to have this  big career? Why do you feel 
compelled to work twenty-four hours a day?" 
Silence. 
Then she says, "I'm sorry. I'm just very confused." 
"No, that's okay," I say. "It was a good question. I have no 
idea why I wouldn't be satisfied being a grocer, or a nine-to-five 
office worker." 
"Al, why don't we just try to forget all this," she suggests. 
"No, I don't think so," I tell her. "I think we should do the 
opposite. We ought to start asking a few more questions." 
Julie gives me a skeptical lo ok and asks, "Like what?" 
"Like what is our marriage supposed to do for us?" I ask her. 
"My idea of the goal of a marriag e is not living in a perfect house 
where everything happens according to a clock. Is that the goal 
for you?" 
"All I'm asking for is a little dependability from my hus- 
band," she says. "And what's all this about a goal? When you're 
married, you're just married. There is no goal." 
"Then why be married?" I ask. 
"You get married because of commitment . . . because of 
Captured by Plamen T.
232
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementlove . . . because of all the reasons everybody else does," she 
says. "Alex, you're asking a lot of dumb questions." 
"Whether they're dumb or smar t ,  I ' m  a s k i n g  t h e m  b e c a u s e  
we've been living together for fifteen years and we have no clear 
understanding of what our marri age is supposed to do ... or 
become ... or anything!" I sputter. "We're just coasting along, 
doing 'what everyone else does.' And it turns out the two of us 
have some very different assumptions of what our lives are sup- 
posed to be like." 
"My parents have been married for thirty-seven years," she 
says, "and they never asked any questions. Nobody ever asks 
'What is the goal of a marriage?' People just get married because 
they're in love." 
"Oh. Well, that explains everything, doesn't it," I say. 
"Al, please don't ask these questions," she says. "They don't 
have any answers. And if we keep talking this way, we're going to 
ruin everything. If this is your way of saying you're having second 
thoughts about us—" 
"Julie, I'm not having second thoughts about you. But you're 
the one who can't figure out what 's wrong with us. Maybe if you 
tried to think about this logically  instead of simply comparing us 
to the characters in a romance novel—" 
"I do not read roman ce novels," she says. 
"Then where did you get your ideas about how a marriage is 
supposed to be?" I ask her. 
She says nothing. 
"All I'm saying is we ought to throw away for the moment all 
the pre-conceptions we have about our marriage, and just take a 
look at how we are right now," I tell her. "Then we ought to 
figure out what we want to have happen and go in that direc- 
tion." 
But Julie doesn't seem to be listening. She stands up. 
"I think it's time we walked back," she says. 
On the way back to the Barnett house, we're as silent as two 
icebergs in January, the two of us drifting together. I look at one 
side of the street; Julie looks at the opposite. When we walk 
through the door, Mrs. Barnett invites me to stay for dinner, but 
I say I've got to be going. I say goodbye to the kids, give Julie a 
wave and leave. 
I'm getting into the Mazda when I hear her come running 
after me.  
Captured by Plamen T.
233
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Will I see you again on Saturday?" she asks. 
I smile a little "Yeah, sure. Sounds good." 
She says, "I'm sorry about what happened." 
"I guess we'll just have to keep trying until we get it right." 
We both start smiling. Then we do some of that nice stuff 
that makes an argument almost worth the agony.  
Captured by Plamen T.
234
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement28 
I get home just as the sun is starting to set. The sky is rosy 
pink. As I'm unlocking the kitche n door, I hear the phone ring- 
ing inside. I rush in to grab it. 
"Good morning," says Jonah. 
"Morning?" Outside the window, the sun is almost below the 
horizon. I laugh. "I'm watching the sun set. Where are you calling 
from?" 
"Singapore," he says. 
"Oh." 
"By the way, from my hote l I'm watching the sun r ise," Jonah 
says. "Alex, I wouldn't have called you at home, but I'm not 
going to be able to talk to  you again for a few weeks." 
"Why not?" 
"Well, it's a long story and I can't go into it now," he says. 
"But I'm sure we'll have a chance to discuss it some time." 
"I see. ..." I wonder what's going on, but say, "That's too 
bad. It puts me in a kind of a bi nd, because I was just about to ask 
for your help again." 
"Has something gone wrong?" he asks. 
"No," I tell him. "Everything is generally going very well 
from an operations standpoint. But I just had a meeting with my 
division vice president, and I was told the plant has to show an 
even bigger improvement." 
"You're still not making money?" he asks. 
I say, "Yes, we are making mo ney again, but we need to 
accelerate the improvement to save the plant from being shut 
down." 
I hear the trace of a chuckle on the other end of the line, and 
Jonah says, "If I were you, I wouldn't worry too much about 
being shut down." 
"Well, from what the head of the division has told me, the 
possibility of a shut-down is real," I tell him. "And until he says 
otherwise, I can't afford to take this lightly." 
"Alex, if you want to improve the plant even more, I'm with 
you all the way," Jonah says. "And  since I won't have the oppor- 
tunity to speak to you for awhile, let's talk about it now. Bring me 
up to date on what's happening."  
Captured by Plamen T.
235
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementSo I do. Then, wondering if we've reached some theoretical 
limit by now, I ask him if there is anything else we can try. 
"Anything else?" he says. "Believe me, we have only begun. 
Now, here's what I suggest. . . ." 
Early the next morning, I'm in my office at the plant consid- 
ering what Jonah told me. Outsid e is the dawn of the day he's 
already seen in Singapore. Stepping out to get a cup of coffee, I 
find Stacey at the coffee machine. 
"Hello there," she says. "I hear  everything went fairly well 
for us at headquarters yesterday." 
"Well, not bad," I say. "I'm af raid we still have a way to go 
before we convince Peach we're good for the long term. But I 
talked to Jonah last night." 
"Did you tell him about our progress?" she asks. 
"Yes," I say. "And he suggested we try what he called 'the 
next logical step.'' 
I see her face take on a ne rvous grin. "What's that?" 
"Cut our batch sizes in half on non-bottlenecks," I say. 
Stacy takes a step back as she thinks about this. "But why?" 
she asks. 
I say with a smile, "Because in the end we'll make more 
money." 
"I don't understand," she says. "How is that going to help 
us?" 
"Hey, Stacey, you're in charge  of inventory control," I tell 
her. "You tell me what would happen if we cut our batch sizes in 
half." 
Thinking, she sips her coffee for a moment. Her brow com- 
presses in concentration. Then sh e says, "If we cut our batch sizes 
in half, then I guess that at any one time we'd have half the work- 
in-process on the floor. I guess that means we'd only need half 
the investment in work-in-process to keep the plant working. If 
we could work it out with our vendors, we could conceivably cut 
all our inventories in half, and by cutting our inventories in half, 
we reduce the amount of cash tied up at any one time, which 
eases the pressure on cash flow." 
I'm nodding each time she says a sentence, and finally I say, 
"That's right. That's one set of benefits." 
She says, "But to reap those benefits fully, we'd have to have 
our suppliers increase the freque ncy of deliveries to us and re- 
duce the quantity of each delivery. That's going to take some 
Captured by Plamen T.
236
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementnegotiating through purchasing, an d I'm not sure all the vendors 
will go for it." 
I tell her, "That's something we can work on. Eventually 
they'll go for it because it's to their advantage as well as ours." 
"But if we go to smaller batch sizes," she says, squinting at 
me in cynicism, "doesn't that mean  we'll have to have more set- 
ups on equipment?" 
"Sure," I say, "don't worry about it." 
"Don't—?" 
"Yeah, don't worry about it." 
"But Donovan—" 
"Donovan will do just fine, even with more setups," I say. 
"And, meanwhile, there is another set of benefits, aside from what 
you said, that we can have almost immediately." 
"What's that?" she asks. 
"You really want to know?" 
"Sure, I do." 
"Good. You set up a meeting with the other functions and I'll 
tell everyone at the same time." 
For dumping that little chore of the meeting arrangements 
on her, Stacey pays me back in kind by setting the meeting for 
noon at the most expensive restau rant in town—with lunch bill- 
able to my expense number, of course. 
"What could I do?" she asks as we sit down at the table. "It 
was the only time everybody was available, right, Bob?" 
"Right," says Bob. 
I'm not mad. Given the quality and quantity of work these 
people have done recently, I can' t complain about picking up the 
tab for lunch. I get right down to telling everybody what Stacey 
and I had talked about this morning, and lead up to the other set 
of benefits. 
Part of what Jonah told me last night over the phone had to 
do with the time a piece of material  spends inside a plant. If you 
consider the total time from the moment the material comes into 
the plant to the minute it goes ou t the door as part of a finished 
product, you can divide that time into four elements. 
One of them is setup, the time  the part spends waiting for a 
resource, while the resource is preparing itself to work on the 
part. 
Captured by Plamen T.
237
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementAnother is process time, which is the amount of time the part 
spends being modified into a new, more valuable form. 
A third element is queue time, which is the time the part 
spends in line for a resource while  the resource is busy working 
on something else ahead of it. 
The fourth element is wait time, which is the time the part 
waits, not for a resource, but for another part so they can be 
assembled together. 
As Jonah pointed out last ni ght, setup and process are a 
small portion of the total elapse d time for any part. But queue 
and wait often consume large amounts of time—in fact, the ma- 
jority of the elapsed total that the part spends inside the plant. 
For parts that are going through bottlenecks, queue is the 
dominant portion. The part is stuck in front of the bottleneck for 
a long time. For parts that are only going through non-bottlenecks, 
wait is dominant, because they are wa iting in front of assembly for 
parts that are coming from the bottlenecks. Which means that in 
each case, the bottlenecks are what dictate this elapsed time. 
Which, in turn, means the bottlenecks dictate inventory as well as 
throughput. 
We have been setting batch sizes according to an economical 
batch quantity (or EBQ) formula. Last night, Jonah told me that 
although he didn't have time ov er the phone to go into all the 
reasons, EBQ has a number of flaw ed assumptions underlying it. 
Instead, he asked me to consid er what would happen if we cut 
batch sizes by half from their present quantities. 
If we reduce batch sizes by half, w e  a l s o  r e d u c e  b y  h a l f  t h e  
time it will take to process a ba tch. That means we reduce queue 
and wait by half as well. Reduce those by half, and we reduce by 
about half the total time parts spend in the plant. Reduce the 
time parts spend in the plant, and. . . . 
"Our total lead time condenses," I explain. "And with less 
time spent sitting in a pile, the speed of the flow of parts in- 
creases." 
"And with faster turn-around on orders, customers get their 
orders faster," says Lou. 
"Not only that," says Stacey, "but with shorter lead times we 
can respond faster." 
"That's right!" I say. "If we ca n respond to the market faster, 
we get an advantage in the marketplace."  
Captured by Plamen T.
238
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"That means more customers come to us because we can 
deliver faster," says Lou. 
"Our sales increase!" I say. 
"And so do our bonuses!" says Stacey. 
"Whoa! Whoa now! Hold up he re a minute!" says Bob. 
"What's the matter?" I ask him. 
"What about setup time?" he sa ys. "You can batch sizes in 
half, you double the number of setups. What about direct labor? 
We got to save on setups to keep down costs." 
"Okay, I knew this would come  up," I tell them. "Now look, 
it's time we think about this carefully. Jonah told me last night 
that there was a corresponding rule to the one about an hour lost 
at a bottleneck. You remember that? An hour lost at a bottleneck 
is an hour lost for the entire system." 
"Yeah, I remember," Bob says. 
I  s a y ,  " T h e  r u l e  h e  g a v e  m e  l a s t  n i g h t  i s  t h a t  a n  h o u r  s a v e d  a t  
a non-bottleneck is a mirage." 
"A mirage!" he says. "What do you mean, an hour saved at a 
non-bottleneck is a mirage? An hour saved is an hour saved!" 
"No, it isn't," I tell him. "Since we began withholding materi- 
als from the floor until the bottlenecks are ready for them, the 
non-bottlenecks now have idle time. It's perfectly okay to have 
more setups on non-bottlenecks, because all we're doing is cut- 
ting into time the machines would spend being idle. Saving set- 
ups at a non-bottleneck doesn't make the system one bit more 
productive. The time and money sa ved is an illusion. Even if we 
double the number of setups, it won't consume all the idle time." 
"Okay, okay," says Bob. "I gu ess I can see what you mean." 
"Now Jonah said, first of all, to cut the batch sizes in half. 
Then he suggested I go immedi ately to marketing and convince 
them to conduct a new campaign  which will promise customers 
earlier deliveries." 
"Can we do it?" asks Lou. 
I tell them, "Already, our lead times have condensed consid- 
erably over what they were before thanks to the priority system 
and making the bottlenecks more productive. We have reduced 
lead time of about three to four months down to two months or 
even less. If we cut our batch sizes in half, how fast do you think 
we can respond?" 
There is an eternity of hemming  and hawing while this is 
debated. 
Captured by Plamen T.
239
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementFinally, Bob admits, "Okay, if we  cut batch sizes in half, then 
that means it ought to take half the time it does now. So instead of 
six to eight weeks, it should take about four weeks . . . maybe 
even three weeks in a lot of cases." 
"Suppose I go to marketing and tell them to promise cus- 
tomers deliveries in three weeks?" I say. 
"Whoa! Hold on!" says Bob. 
"Yeah, give us a br eak!" says Stacey. 
"All right, four weeks then," I say. "That's reasonable, isn't 
it?" 
"Sounds reasonable to me," says Ralph. 
"Well . .  . okay," says Stacey. 
"I think we should risk it," says Lou. 
"So are you willing to commit to this with us?" I ask Bob. 
Bob sits back and says, "Well . . . I'm all for bigger bonuses. 
What the hell. Let's try it." 
Friday morning finds the Mazda and me again hustling up 
the Interstate toward headquarters. I hit town just as the sun hits 
the glass of the UniCo building and reflects a blinding glare. 
Kind of pretty actually. For a moment, it takes my mind off my 
nerves. I've got a meeting scheduled with Johnny Jons in his 
office. When I called, he was qui te willing to see me, but sounded 
less than enthusiastic about what I sa id I'd like to talk about. I feel 
there's a lot riding on my ability to convince him to go along with 
what we want to do. So I've fo und myself biting a fingernail or 
two during the trip. 
Jons doesn't really have a desk in his office. He has a sheet of 
glass on chrome legs. I guess that's so that everyone can get a 
good look at his Gucci loafers and silk socks—which he exposes as 
he leans back in this chair, interweaves his fingers and puts them 
behind his head. 
He says, "So . .  . how is everything going?" 
"Everything is going very well right now," I say. "In fact, 
that's why I wanted to talk to you." 
Jons immediately dons an impassive face. 
"All right, listen," I tell him, "I'm going to lay my cards out 
for you. I'm not exaggerating when  I say everything is going well. 
It is. We've worked off our backlog of overdue orders, as you 
know. At the beginning of last week, the plant began producing 
strictly to meet projected due dates."  
Captured by Plamen T.
240
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementJons nods and says, "Yes, I've noticed my phone hasn't been 
ringing lately with complaints from customers missing their or- 
ders." 
"My point," I tell him, "is that we've really turned the plant 
around. Here, look at this." 
From my breifcase, I take the latest list of customer orders. 
Among other things, it shows the due dates promised, along with 
the dates when Ralph expected sh ipment, and the dates the prod- 
ucts were actually shipped. 
"You see," I tell Jons as he studies the list on the glass top of 
his table, "we can predict to within twenty-four hours one way or 
the other when an orde r will leave the plant." 
"Yes, I've seen something like this floating around," says 
Jons. "These are the dates?" 
"Of course." 
"This is impressive," says Jons. 
"As you can see by comparing a few recently shipped orders 
with ones of a month or so before, our production lead times 
have condensed dramatically. Four months' lead time is no 
longer a holy number with us. From the day you sign the contract 
with the customer to the day we  ship, the current average is 
about two months. Now, tell me, do you think that could help us 
in the marketplace?" 
"Sure it could," says Jons. 
"Then how about four weeks'?"  
"What? Al, don't be ridiculous," says Jons. "Four weeks!" 
"We can do it." 
"Come on!" he says. "Last wi nter, when demand for every 
damn thing we make was way down, we were promising delivery 
in four months, and it was taking six! Now you're telling me you 
can go from contract to fini shed product in four weeks?" 
"I wouldn't be here talking to you if we couldn't," I tell him, 
hoping desperately that we're right. 
Jons snorts, unconvinced. 
"Johnny, the truth is I need more business," I tell him. 
"With our overdues gone, and our current backlog declining, 
I've got to get more work into my plant. Now we both know the 
business is out there; it's just that the competition is getting more 
of it than we are." 
Jons looks at me through narrowed eyes. "You can really 
Captured by Plamen T.
241
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementturn around an order of 200 Model 12's or 300 DBD-50's in four 
weeks?" 
"Try me," I tell him. "Get me five orders—hell, get me ten 
orders—and I'll prove it to you." 
"And what happens to our credibility if you can't come 
through?" he asks. 
Flustered, I look down through the glass table. 
"Johnny," I say, "I'll make a be t with you. If I don't deliver 
in four weeks, I'll buy you a brand new pair of Guccis." 
He laughs, shakes his head and finally says, "Okay, you're 
on. I'll pass the word to the salesp eople that on all your products, 
we're offering terms of factory shipment in six weeks." 
I start to protest. Jons holds up a hand. 
"I know you're confident," he says. "And if you ship any new 
orders in less than five weeks, I'll buy you a new pair of shoes." 
Captured by Plamen T.
242
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement29 
A full moon is shining thro ugh the bedroom window and 
into my eyes. The night is still. I look at the clock beside me, 
which says it's 4:20 A.M. Next to me in bed, Julie is sleeping. 
Resting on my elbow, I look do wn at Julie. With her dark 
hair spilled out on the white pillow, she looks nice sleeping in the 
moonlight. I watch her for a while. I wonder what her dreams are 
like. 
When I woke up, I was having a nightmare. It was about the 
plant. I was running up and down  the aisles and Bill Peach was 
chasing me in his crimson Merced es. Every time he was about to 
run me over, I'd duck between a co uple of machines or hop on a 
passing forklift. He was yelling at me from the window about my 
bottom line not being good enough . Finally he trapped me in the 
shipping department. I had my ba ck against stacks of cardboard 
cartons, and the Mercedes was ra cing toward me at a hundred 
miles an hour. I tried to shield my eyes from the blinding head- 
lights. Just as Peach was about to get me, I woke up and discov- 
ered that the headlights were moonbeams on my face. 
Now I'm too much awake, and too aware of the problem I 
was trying to forget this past evening with Julie for me to fall back 
to sleep. Not wanting to awaken Ju lie with my restlessness, I slip 
out of bed. 
The house is all ours tonight. We started out this evening 
with nothing particular to do, when we remembered we had a 
whole house in Bearington with nobo dy in it to bother us. So we 
bought a bottle of wine, some chee se and a loaf of bread, came 
here and got comfortable. 
From the living room window where I stand in the dark 
looking out, it seems as though the whole world is asleep except 
me. I'm angry with myself at not being able to sleep. But I can't 
let go of what's on my mind. 
Yesterday we had a staff meetin g. There was some good news 
—and some bad news. Actually, there was a lot of good news. 
High among the headlines were the new contracts marketing has 
been winning for us. We've pick ed up about half-a-dozen new 
orders since I talked to Johnny. More good news was the fact that 
Captured by Plamen T.
243
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementefficiencies have gone up, not down, as a result of what we've 
been doing in the plant. After we began withholding the release 
of materials and timing the releases according to the completed 
processing of heat-treat and the NCX-10, efficiencies dipped 
somewhat. But that was because we were consuming excess in- 
ventories. When the excess inventories were exhausted—which 
happened quickly as a result of the increase in throughput—effi- 
ciencies came back up again. 
Then, two weeks ago, we implemented the new smaller batch 
sizes. When we cut batch sizes in half for non-bottlenecks, effi- 
ciencies stayed solid, and now it seems as though we're keeping 
the work force even more occupied than before. 
That's because a really terrific thing has happened. Before 
we reduced batch sizes, it wasn 't uncommon for a work center to 
be forced idle because it didn 't have anything to process—even 
though we were wading through excess inventory. It was usually 
because the idle work center had to wait for the one preceding it 
to finish a large batch of some item. Unless told otherwise by an 
expediter, the materials handlers would wait until an entire batch 
was completed before moving it. In fact, that's still the case. But 
now that the batches are smaller, the parts are ready to be moved 
to the next work station sooner than they were before. 
What we had been doing many times was turning a non- 
bottleneck into a temporary bottleneck. This was forcing other 
work centers downstream from it to be idle, which reflected 
poorly on efficiencies. Now, even though we've recognized that 
non-bottlenecks have to be idle periodically, there is actually less 
idle time than before. Since we cut batch sizes, work is flowing 
through the plant more smoothly than ever. And it's weird, but 
the idle time we do have is less noticeable. It's spread out in 
shorter segments. Instead of people hanging around with noth- 
ing to do for a couple of hours, now they'll have maybe a few ten- 
to twenty-minute waits through th e day for the same volume of 
work. From everybody's stand point, that's much better. 
Still more good news is that inventories are at their lowest 
ever in the plant. It's almost shocking to walk out into the plant 
now. Those stacks and piles of parts and sub-assemblies have 
shrunk to half their former size. It's as if a fleet of trucks had 
come and hauled everything away . Which is, in fact, about what 
happened. We've shipped the excess inventory as finished prod- 
uct. Of course, the notable part of the story is that we haven't 
Captured by Plamen T.
244
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementfilled the plant back up again by dumping new work-in-process 
on the floor. The only work-in-pro cess out there now is for cur- 
rent demand. 
But then there's the bad news. Which is what I'm thinking 
about when I hear footsteps on the carpet behind me in the dark 
"Al?" 
"Yeah." 
"How come you're out here in the dark?" 
"Can't sleep." 
"What's wrong?" 
"Nothing." 
"Then why don't you come back to bed?" 
"I'm just thinking about some things." 
It's quiet for a second. For a moment, I think she's gone 
away. Then I feel her beside me. 
"Is it the plant?" she asks. 
"Yeah." 
"But I thought everything was getting better," she says. 
"What's wrong?" 
"It has to do with our cost measurement," I tell her. 
She sits down beside me. 
"Why don't you tell me about it," she says. 
"Sure you want to hear about it?" I ask. 
"Yes, I do." 
So I tell her: the cost of parts looks as though it's gone up 
because of the additional setups necessitated by the smaller batch 
sizes. 
"Oh," she says. "I guess that's bad, right?" 
"Politically speaking, yes," I tell her. "Financially speaking, it 
doesn't make a damn bit of difference." 
"How come?" she asks. 
"Well ... do you know why it looks like the cost has gone 
up?" I ask her. 
"No, not at all," she says. 
I get up to switch on a lamp and find a piece of paper and 
pencil. 
I tell her, "Okay, I'll give you an example. Suppose we have 
a batch of 100 parts. The time to set up the machine is 2 hours, or 
120 minutes. And the process time per part is 5 minutes. So we've 
invested per part 5 minutes plus 2 hours of set-up divided by 100. 
It comes to 1.2 minutes of set-up per part. According to the ac- 
Captured by Plamen T.
245
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementcountants, the cost of the part is  based upon direct labor of 6.2 
minutes. 
"Now if we cut the batch in half, we still have the same 
amount of set-up time. But it's spread over 50 parts instead of 
100. So now we've got 5 minutes of process time, plus 2.4 minutes 
of set-up for a grand total of 7.4 minutes of direct labor. And the 
calculations are all based on the cost of direct labor." 
Then I explain the way costs are calculated. First, there is the 
raw material cost. Then there is  the cost of direct labor. And 
finally there is "burden," which essentially works out to be cost of 
the direct labor multiplied by a fact or, in our case, of about three. 
So on paper, if the direct labor goes up, the burden also goes up. 
"So with more set-ups, the cost  of making parts goes up," 
says Julie. 
"It looks that way," I tell her, "but in fact it hasn't really done 
anything to our actual expenses. We haven't added more people 
to the payroll. We haven't added any additional cost by doing 
more set-ups. In fact, the cost of parts has gone down since we 
began the smaller batch sizes." 
"Down? How come?" 
"Because we've reduced inventory and increased the amount 
of money we're bringing in through sales," I explain. "So the 
same burden, the same direct labor cost is now spread over more 
product. By making and selling more product for the same cost, 
our operating expense has gone down, not up." 
"How could the measurement be wrong?" she asks. 
I say, "The measurement assumes that all of the workers in 
the plant are always going to be fully occupied, and therefore, in 
order to do more set-ups, you ha ve to hire more people. That 
isn't true." 
"What are you going to do?" she asks me. 
I look up at the window. The sun is now over the roof of my 
neighbor's house. I reac h over for her hand. 
"What am I going to do? I'm going to take you out to break- 
fast." 
When I get to the office, Lou walks in. 
"More bad news for me?" I joke. 
He says, "Look ... I think I can help you out on this cost 
of products thing." 
"Yeah? Like how?"  
Captured by Plamen T.
246
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"I can change the base we're using for determining the cost 
of parts. Instead of using the co st factor of the past twelve 
months, which is what I'm supposed  to be doing, we can use the 
past two months. That will help us, because for the past two 
months, we've had big increases in throughput." 
"Yeah," I say, sensing the possi bilities. "Yeah, that might 
work. And actually the past two months are a lot more represen- 
tative of what's really going on here than what happened last 
year." 
Lou leans from side to side. He says, "We-l-l-l, yes, that's 
true. But according to accounting policy, it's not valid." 
"Okay, but we have a good excuse," I say. "The plant is 
different now. We're really a hell of a lot better than we were." 
"Al, the problem is Ethan Frost will never buy it," says Lou. 
"Then why did you suggest it?" 
"Frost won't buy it if he knows about it," says Lou. 
I nod slowly. "I see." 
"I can give you something that will slide through on the first 
glance," says Lou. "But if Frost and his assistants at division do 
any checking, they'll see th rough it in no time." 
"You're saying we could end up in very hot water," I say. 
"Yeah, but if you want to take  a chance. . . ." says Lou. 
"It could give us a couple more months to really show what 
we can do," I say, finish ing the thought for him. 
I get up and walk around for a minute turning this over in 
my mind. 
Finally I look at Lou and say, "There is no way I can show 
Peach an increase in the cost of parts and convince him the plant 
is better off this month than last . If he sees these numbers and 
gets the idea our costs are going up, we'll be in hot water any- 
way." 
"So you want to try it?" Lou asks. 
"Sure." 
"All right," he says. "Remember, if we get caught— 
"Don't worry. I'll practice my tap dancing." 
As Lou is on his way out, Fran buzzes me to say Johnny Jons 
is on my line. I pick up the phone. 
"Hello there," I tell him, We're practically old pals by now; 
I've been on the phone with him just about every day—and 
sometimes three or four times a day—for the past few weeks. 
"What can I do for you today?"  
Captured by Plamen T.
247
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Remember our dear friend Bucky Burnside?" says Jons. 
"How could I forget good ole Bucky," I say. "Is he still com- 
plaining about us?" 
"No, not anymore," says Jons. "At the moment, in fact, we 
don't even have a single active contract with Burnside's people. 
That's the reason I'm calling. For the first time in months, they've 
expressed interest in buying something from us again." 
"What are they interested in?" 
"Model 12's," he says. "They need a thousand units." 
"Terrific!" 
"Maybe not," says Jons. "They need the whole order by the 
end of the month." 
"That's only about two weeks away," I say. 
"I know," says Jons. "The sales rep on this already checked 
with the warehouse. Turns out we've only got about fifty of the 
Model 12's in stock." 
He's telling me, of course, we'll have to manufacture the 
other 950 by the end of the mo nth if we want the business. 
"Well . . . Johnny, look, I know  I told you I wanted busi- 
ness, and you've pulled in some nice contracts since I talked to 
you," I say. "But a thousand Mode l 12's in two weeks is asking a 
lot." 
He says, "Al, to tell you the tr uth, I didn't really think we 
could do anything with this one when I called. But I thought I'd 
let you know about it, just in case you knew something I didn't. 
After all, a thousand units means a little over a million dollars in 
sales to us." 
"Yes, I realize that," I say. "Look, what's going on that they 
need these things so fast?" 
He tells me he did some di gging and found out that the 
order had originally gone to our number-one competitor, who 
makes a product similar to the Model 12. The competitor had 
had the order on its books for about five months. But they hadn't 
filled it yet, and this week it b ecame clear they would not be able 
to meet the due date. 
"My guess is that Burnside turned to us, because they've 
heard about us offering such fast turn-around to everyone else," 
he says. "Frankly, I think they're de sperate. And, hell, if there is 
any way we can pull this off, it'd sure be a good way for us to save 
face with them."  
Captured by Plamen T.
248
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Well, I don't know. I'd like t hat business back again, too, 
but. . . ." 
"The real kick in the head is if we had only had the foresight 
to build a finished goods inventory of Model 12's while we had 
those slow sales months, we could have made this sale," he says. 
I have to smile to myself, because at the beginning of the 
year I might have agreed with that. 
"It's too bad," Johnny is saying . "Aside from the initial busi- 
ness, it could have been a big opportunity for us." 
"How big?" 
"Strong hints have been dropped that if we can come 
through on this one, we could b ecome their preferred supplier," 
says Jons. 
I'm quiet for a moment. 
"All right. You really want this, don't you?" I ask him. 
"So bad I can taste it," he says. "B ut if it's impossible. .  . ." 
"When do you have to let them know?" I ask. 
"Probably sometime today, or tomorrow at the latest," he 
says. "Why? Do you think we can really do it?" 
"Maybe there's a way. Let me see how we stand and I'll give 
you a call back," I tell him. 
As soon as I get off the phone  with Jons, I round up Bob, 
Stacey, and Ralph for a meeting in  my office, and when we're all 
together I tell him what Jons told me. 
"Ordinarily, I would think this is out of the question," I say. 
"But before we say no, let's think about it." 
Everybody looks at me with the certain knowledge this is 
going to be a waste of time. 
I say, "Let's just see what we can do, okay?" 
For the rest of the mo rning, we're busy with this. We go over 
the bill of material. Stacey chec ks on raw materials inventories. 
Ralph does a quick estimate of how long it will take to produce a 
thousand units after the materials are on hand. By eleven o'clock, 
he has calculated that the bottlenecks can turn out parts for the 
Model 12 at the rate of about one-hundred per day. 
"So, yes, it would be technically feasible for us to take the 
order," says Ralph. "But that's only if we work on nothing else 
for two weeks except the thou sand units for Burnside." 
"No, I don't want to do that," I tell him, thinking about us 
Captured by Plamen T.
249
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementscrewing up relations with a doze n customers just to please one. 
"Let's try something else." 
"Like what?" asks Bob, who is sitting there with us, looking 
about as enthusiastic as a bump on a log. 
I say, "A few weeks ago, we cu t our batch sizes by half, and 
the result was we could condense  the time inventory spends in 
the plant, which also gave us an increase in throughput. What if 
we cut the batch sizes by half again?"  
Ralph says, "Gee, I hadn't thought of that." 
Bob leans forward. "Cut them again? Sorry, Al, but I don't 
see how the heck that can help us, not with the volume we're 
already committed to." 
"You know," says Ralph, "we have quite a few orders we'd 
planned to ship ahead of their due dates. We could re-schedule 
some of those in the priority sy stem so they'd ship when prom- 
ised instead of early. That could give us more time available on 
the bottlenecks, and it wouldn't hurt anybody." 
"Good point, Ralph," I tell him. 
"But, hell, we still can't get a thousand units done no-how," 
drawls Bob. "Not in two weeks." 
I say, "Well, then, if we cut the batch sizes, how many units 
can we do in two weeks and still ship our current orders on time." 
Bob pulls on his chin and says, "I guess we could look into 
it." 
"I'll see what I can find out," says Ralph, standing so he can 
leave and go back to his computer. 
His interest finally piqued, Bob says, "Maybe I'd better go 
with you so we can noodle this thing out together." 
While Ralph and Bob are wrestling with this new possibility, 
Stacey enters with news about in ventories. She's ascertained we 
can obtain all the materials we n eed either from our own stocks 
or from vendors within a fe w days, with one exception. 
"The electronic control modules for the Model 12 are a 
problem," says Stacey. "We don't have enough of this type in 
stock. And we don't have the technology to build them in-house. 
But we've located a vendor in California who has them. Unfortu- 
nately, the vendor can't promise a shipment of that quantity in 
less than four to six weeks, including shipping. I'd say we might 
as well forget it." 
"Wait a minute, Stacey; we're thinking about a little change 
in strategy. How many modules could they give us per week?" I 
Captured by Plamen T.
250
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementask her. "And how soon could they ship the first week's quantity 
to us?" 
"I don't know, but doing it that way, we might not be able to 
get a volume discount," says Stacey. 
"Why not?" I ask. "We'd be committing to the same thou- 
sand units—it's just that we'd be staggering the shipments." 
"Well, then there's the adde d shipping cost," she says. 
"Stacey, we're talking a million dollars in business here," I 
tell her. 
"Okay, but they'll take at least three days to a week to get 
here by truck," she says. 
"So why can't we have them sh ipped air freight?" I ask. 
"They're not very big parts." 
"Well. . . ." says Stacey. 
"Look into it, but I doubt if the air freight bill is going to eat 
up the profit on a million-dollar sale," I tell her. "And if we can't 
get these parts, we can't get the sale." 
"All right. I'll see what they can do," she says. 
At the end of the day, the details are still being sweated out, 
but we know enough for me to place a call to Jons. 
"I've got a deal on those Model 12's for you to relay to Burn- 
side," I say. 
"Really?" says Jons excitedly. "You want to take the busi- 
ness?" 
"Under certain conditions," I tell him. "First of all, there is 
no way we can deliver the full thousand units in two weeks. But 
we can ship 250 per week to them for four weeks." 
"Well, okay, they might go for that," says Jons, "but when 
can you start shipping?" 
"Two weeks from the day they give us the order," I say. 
"Are you sure about this?" asks Johnny. 
"The units will ship when we say they will," I tell him. 
"You're that confident?" 
"Yes." 
"Okay, okay. I'll call them and s ee if they're interested. But, 
Al, I just hope what you're telling me is real, because I don't want 
to go through all the hassles we had before with these people." 
Captured by Plamen T.
251
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementA couple of hours later, my phone rings at home. 
"Al? We got it! We got the order!" shouts Jons into my right 
ear. 
And in my left ear, I hear a million bucks rung up on the 
cash register. 
"You know what?" Jons is saying. "They even like the smaller 
shipments better than getting all thousand units at once!" 
I tell him, "Okay, great, I'll get the ball rolling right away. 
You can tell them that two weeks fr om today, we'll ship the first 
250." 
Captured by Plamen T.
252
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement30 
At the beginning of the new mont h, we have a staff meeting. 
Everyone is present except Lou. Bob tells me he'll be in shortly. I 
sit down and fidget. To get the meeting rolling while we're wait- 
ing for Lou, I ask about shipments. 
"How is Burnside's order coming along?" I ask. 
"The first shipment went out as scheduled," says Donovan. 
"How about the rest of it?" I ask. 
"No problems to speak of," sa ys Stacey. "The control boxes 
were a day late, but there was time enough for us to assemble 
without delaying the shipment. We got this week's batch from the 
vendor on time." 
I say, "Good. What's the latest on the smaller batches?" 
"The flow through the shop is even better now," says Bob. 
"Excellent," I say. 
Just then Lou comes into the m eeting. He's late because he 
was finishing the figures for this month. He sits down and looks 
straight at me. 
"Well?" I ask. "Did we get our fifteen percent?" 
"No," he says, "we got seventeen  percent, thanks in part to 
Burnside. And the coming month looks just fine." 
Then he goes into a wrap-up of how we performed through 
the second quarter. We're now soli dly in the black. Inventories 
are about forty percent of what they were three months ago. 
Throughput has doubled. 
"Well, we've come a long way, haven't we?" I ask. 
Sitting on my desk when I get back from lunch the next day 
are two crisp, white envelopes with the UniWare Division logo in 
the upper left corner. I open one and unfold the stiff stationery. 
The body of the letter is only two short paragraphs, with Bill 
Peach's signature on the bottom. It 's congratulating us on the 
Burnside business. Tearing open the other, I find it too is from 
Peach. It too is short and to the point. It formally directs me to 
prepare for a performance review of the plant, which is to be held 
at headquarters. 
The smile I had from reading the first letter broadens. Three 
Captured by Plamen T.
253
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementmonths ago, that second letter would have dunked me into 
dread, because although it doesn' t say so directly, I presume the 
review will be the occasion for determining the future of the 
plant. I was expecting some kind of formal evaluation. And now I 
am no longer dreading it—on the contrary, I welcome it. What 
do we have to worry about? Hell, this is an opportunity to show 
what we've done! 
Throughput is going up as marketing spreads the word 
about us to other customers. Inventories are a fraction of what 
they were and still falling. With more business and more parts 
over which to spread the costs, operating expense is down. We're 
making money. 
The following week, I'm away from the plant for two days 
with my personnel manager, Scott Dolin. We're at an off-site, very 
confidential meeting in St. Louis with the division's labor rela- 
tions group and the other plant ma nagers. Most of the discussion 
is about winning wage concessions from the various unions. It's a 
frustrating session for me—at Bearington, we don't particularly 
need to lower wages. So I'm less than enthusiastic about much of 
the strategy suggested, knowing it could lead to problems with 
the union, which could lead to a strike, which could kill the prog- 
ress we've been making with cust omers. Aside from all that, the 
meeting is poorly run and ends with  very little decided. I return 
to Bearington. 
About four in the afternoon, I walk through the doors of the 
office building. The receptionist flag s me down as I pass. She tells 
me Bob Donovan has asked to see me the moment I arrive. I 
have Bob paged and he comes hurrying into my office a few 
minutes later. 
"What's up, Bob?" I ask. 
"Hilton Symth," he says. "He wa s here in the plant today." 
"He was here?" I ask. "Why?" 
Bob shakes his head and says, "Remember the videotape 
about robots that was in the wo rks a couple of months ago?" 
"That was killed," I say. 
"Well, it was reincarnated," says Bob. "Only now it's Hilton, 
because he's productivity manager for the division, doing the 
speech instead of Granby. I was having a cup of coffee out of the 
machine over by C-aisle this morn ing when I see this T.V. crew 
Captured by Plamen T.
254
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementcome trooping along. By the ti me I found out what they were 
doing here, Hilton Smyth is  standing at my elbow." 
"Didn't anybody here know they were coming?" I ask. 
He tells me Barbara Penn, our employee communicator, 
knew about it. 
"And she didn't think to tell anybody?" I say. 
"See, the whole thing was re-scheduled on short notice," says 
Bob. "Since you and Scott weren' t around, she went ahead on 
her own, cleared it with the un ion, and made all the arrange- 
ments. She sent around a memo, but nobody got a copy until this 
morning." 
"Nothing like initiative," I mutter. 
He goes on to tell me about how Hilton's crew proceeded to 
set up in front of one of the ro bots—not the welding types, but 
another kind of robot which stacks materials. It soon became ob- 
vious there was a problem, however: the robot didn't have any- 
thing to do. There was no invent ory for it, and no work on its 
way. 
In a videotape about productivi ty, the robot, of course, could 
not simply sit there in the background and do nothing. It had to 
be producing. So for an hour, Donovan an d a couple of assistants 
searched every corner of the plant for something the robot could 
manipulate. Meanwhile, Smyth became bored with the wait, so he 
started wandering around, and it wasn't long before he noticed a 
few things. 
"When we got back with the mate rials, Hilton started asking 
all kinds of things about our batch sizes," says Bob. "I didn't 
know what to tell him, because I wasn't sure what you've said up 
at headquarters and, uh . . . well, I just thought you ought to 
know." 
I feel my stomach twisting. Just then the phone rings. I pick 
it up at my desk. It's Ethan Fr ost at headquarters. He tells me 
he's just had a talk with Hilton Smyth. I excuse myself to Bob, 
and he leaves. When he's gone and the door is shut, I talk to 
Frost for a couple of minutes and afterwards go down to see Lou. 
I walk though the door and start to tap dance. 
Two days later, an audit team from headquarters arrives at 
the plant. The team is headed by the division's assistant control- 
ler, Neil Cravitz, a fiftyish man who has the most bone-crushing 
handshake and the most humorless stare of anyone I've ever met. 
Captured by Plamen T.
255
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementThey march in and take over the conference room. In hardly any 
time at all, they've found we changed the base for determining 
the cost of products. 
"This is highly irregular," says Cravitz, peering at us over the 
tops of his glasses as he looks up from the spreadsheets. 
Lou stammers that, okay, maybe it wasn't exactly according 
to policy, but we had valid reasons  for basing costs on a current 
two-month period. 
I added, "It's actually a more  truthful representation this 
way," 
"Sorry, Mr. Rogo," says Cravit z. "We have to observe stan- 
dard policy." 
"But the plant is different now!" 
Around the table, all five a ccountants are frowning at Lou 
and me. I finally shake my head. There is no sense attempting to 
appeal to them. All they know are their accounting standards. 
The audit team recalculates the numbers, and it now looks as 
if our costs have gone up. When they leave, I try to head them off 
by calling Peach before they can return, but Peach is unexpect- 
edly out of town. I try Frost, but he's gone too. One of the secre- 
taries offers to put me through to Smyth, who seems to be the 
only manager in the offices, bu t I ungracefully decline. 
For a week, I wait for the blast from headquarters. But it 
never comes. Lou gets a rebuke from Frost in the form of a memo 
warning him to stick to approved  policy, and a formal order to 
redo our quarterly report accordin g to the old cost standards and 
to submit it before the review . From Peach, there is nothing. 
I'm in the middle of a meeting with Lou over our revised 
monthly report early one afterno on. I'm crestfallen. With the 
numbers based on the old cost factor, we're not going to make 
our fifteen percent. We're only going to record a 12.8 percent 
increase on the bottom line, not th e seventeen percent Lou origi- 
nally calculated. 
"Lou, can't we massage this a little more?" I'm pleading. 
He shakes his head. "From now on, Frost is going to be scru- 
tinizing everything we submit. I can't do any better than what 
you see now." 
Just then I become aware of this sound outside the offices 
that's getting louder and louder. 
Wuppa-wuppa-wuppa-wuppa-wu ppa-wuppa-wuppa-wuppa. 
Captured by Plamen T.
256
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementI look at Lou and he looks at me. 
"Is that a helicopter?" I ask. 
Lou goes to the window and looks out. 
"Sure is, and it's landing on our lawn!" he says. 
I get to the window just as it touches down. Dust and brown 
grass clippings are whirling in th e prop wash around this sleek 
red and white helicopter. With the blades still twirling down to a 
stop, the door opens and two men get out. 
"That first one looks like Johnny Jons," says Lou. 
"It is Johnny Jons," I say. 
"Who's the other guy?" asks Lou. 
I'm not sure. I watch them cross the lawn and start to walk 
through the parking lot. Something about the girth and the strid- 
ing, arrogant swagger of the huge, white-haired second man trig- 
gers the recollection of a distant meeting. It dawns on me who he 
is. 
"Oh, god," I say. 
"I didn't think He needed a helicopter to get around," says 
Lou. 
"It's worse than God," I sa y, "It's Bucky Burnside!" 
Before Lou can utter another word, I'm running for the 
door. I dash around the corner and into Stacey's office. She, 
along with her secretary and some  people she's meeting with, are 
all at the window. Everybody is  watching the damn helicopter. 
"Stacey, quick, I need to talk to you right now!" 
She comes over to the door and I pull her into the hallway. 
"What's the status on Burnside's Model 12's?" I ask her. 
"The last shipment went out two days ago." 
"It was on time?" 
"Sure," she says. "It went out the door with no problems, 
just like the previous shipments." 
I'm running again, mumbling "tha nks" over my shoulder to 
her. 
"Donovan!" 
He's not in his office. I stop at his secretary's desk. 
"Where's Bob?" I ask her. 
"I think he went to the men's room," she says. 
I go sprinting in that direction. Bursting through the door, I 
find Bob washing his hands. 
"On Burnside's order," I ask him, "were there any quality 
problems?" 
Captured by Plamen T.
257
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"No," says Bob, startled to se e me. "Nothing I know about." 
"Were there any problems on that order?" I ask him. 
He reaches for a paper towel and dries his hands. "No, the 
whole thing came off like clockwork." 
I fall back against the wall. "Then what the hell is he doing 
here?" 
"Is who doing here?" asks Bob. 
"Burnside," I tell him. "He just landed in a helicopter with 
Johnny Jons." 
"What?"  
"Come with me," I tell him. 
We go to the receptionist, but nobody is in the waiting area. 
"Did Mr. Jons come through here just now with a cus- 
tomer?" I ask her. 
She says, "The two men in the helicopter? No I watched 
them and they went past here and into the plant." 
Bob and I hustle side by side down the corridor and through 
the double doors, into the orange light and production din of the 
plant. One of the supervisors sees  us from across the aisle and, 
without being asked, points in the direction Jons and Burnside 
took. As we head down the aisl e, I spot them ahead of us. 
Burnside is walking up to every employee he sees and he's 
shaking hands with each of them. Honest! He's shaking hands, 
clapping them on the arm, saying things to them. And he's smil- 
ing. 
Jons is walking with him. He's  doing the same thing. As soon 
as Burnside lets go of a hand, Jo ns shakes it as well. They're 
pumping everybody in sight. 
Finally, Jons sees us approac hing, taps Burnside on the 
shoulder, and says something to hi m. Burnside dons this big grin 
and comes striding up to me with his hand extended. 
"Here's the man I especially want to congratulate," says 
Burnside in a growling kind of voice. "I was saving the best for 
last, but you beat me to it. How are you?" 
"Fine, just fine, Mr. Burnside," I tell him. 
"Rogo, I came down here because I want to shake the hand 
of every employee in your whole plant," growls Burnside. "That 
was a hell of job this plant did on our order. A hell of a good job! 
Those other bastards had the order for five months and still 
couldn't get it down, and here your people finish the whole thing 
in five weeks. Must have been  an incredible effort!"  
Captured by Plamen T.
258
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementBefore I can say anything, Jons jumps into the conversation 
and says, "Bucky and I were havin g lunch today, and I was telling 
him how you pulled out all the stops for him, how everybody 
down here really gave it everything they had." 
I say, "Ah . . . yeah, we just did our best." 
"Mind if I go ahead?" asks Burnside, intending to continue 
down the aisle. 
"No, not at all," I say. 
"Won't hurt your efficiency, will it?" asks Burnside. 
"Not one bit," I tell him. "You go right ahead." 
I turn to Donovan then and ou t of the corner of my mouth 
say, "Get Barbara Penn down here right away with the camera 
she uses for the employee news. And tell her to bring lots of film." 
Donovan goes trotting off to th e offices, and Jons and I fol- 
low Bucky up and down the aisles , the three of us shaking hands 
with one and all. 
Johnny, I notice, is virtually atwitter with excitement. When 
Burnside is far enough ahead that he can't hear us, he turns to 
me and asks, "What's your shoe size?" 
"Ten and a half," I tell him. "Why?" 
"I owe you a pair of shoes," says Jons. 
I say, "That's okay, Johnny; don't worry about it." 
"Al, I'm telling you, we're meeting with Burnside's people 
next week on a long-term contract for Model 12's—10,000 units a 
year!" 
The number just about se nds me reeling backwards. 
"And I'm calling in my whole department when I get back," 
Jons continues as we walk. "We're going to do a new campaign 
pushing everything you make down here, because this is the only 
plant we've got in this damn division that can ship a quality prod- 
uct on time. With your lead times,  Al, we're going to blow every- 
body out of the market! Thanks to you, we've finally got a win- 
ner." 
I'm beaming. "Thanks Johnny. But, as it turned out, Burn- 
side's order didn't take any extra effort at all." 
"Shhhh! Don't let Burnsi de know," Johnny says. 
Behind me, I hear two hourly guys talking. 
"What was that a ll about?" asks one. 
"Beats me," says the other. "Guess we musta done somthin' 
right." 
On the eve of the plant perfor mance review, with presenta- 
Captured by Plamen T.
259
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementtion rehearsed and ten copies of our report in hand, and with 
nothing more to do except imagine what could go wrong, I call 
Julie. 
"Hi," I tell her. "Listen, I have to be at headquarters for a 
meeting tomorrow morning. And b ecause Forest Grove is more 
or less on the way, I'd like to come up and be with you tonight. 
What do you think?" 
"Sure, it sounds great," she says. 
So I leave work a little ea rly and hit the highway. 
As I head up the Interstate, Be arington is spread out to my 
left. The "Buy Me!" sign on top of the high-rise office building is 
still in place. Living and breathin g within the range of my sight 
are 30,000 people who have no idea that one small but important 
part of the town's economic future will be decided tomorrow. 
Most of them haven't the slightest interest in the plant or what 
we've done here—except if UniWare closes us, they'll be mad and 
scared. And if we stay open? No body will care. Nobody will even 
know what we went through. 
Well, win or lose, I know I did my best. 
When I get to Julie's parents' house, Sharon and Dave run 
up to the car. After getting out o f  m y  s u i t  a n d  i n t o  s o m e  " o f f -  
duty" clothes, I spend about an hour throwing a frisbee to the 
two kids. When they've exhausted me, Julie has the idea the two 
of us should go out to dinner. I get the feeling she wants to talk to 
me. I clean up a little and off we go. As we're driving along, we 
pass the park. 
"Al, why don't we stop for awhile," says Julie. 
"How come?" I ask. 
"The last time we were here we never finished our walk," she 
says. 
So I pull over. We get out and walk. By and by, we come to 
the bench by the river, an d the two of us sit down. 
"What's your meeting about tomorrow?" she asks. 
"It's a plant performance review ," I say. "The division will 
decide the future of the plant." 
"Oh. What do you think they'll say?" 
"We didn't quite make what I promised Bill Peach," I say. 
"One set of numbers doesn't look as  good as it truly is because of 
the cost-of-products standards. You remember me telling you 
about some of that, don't you?"  
Captured by Plamen T.
260
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementShe nods, I shake my head momentarily, still angry at what 
happened as a result of the audit. 
"But even with that, we still had a good month. It just 
doesn't show up as the fantastic mo nth we really had," I tell her. 
"You don't think they'd still close the plant, do you?" she 
asks. 
"I don't think so," I say. "A person would have to be an idiot 
to condemn us just because of an increase in cost of products. 
Even with screwed-up measurements, we're making money." 
She reaches over to take my hand and says, "It was nice of 
you to take me out to breakfast that morning." 
I  s m i l e  a n d  s a y ,  " A f t e r  l i s t e n i n g  t o  m e  r a m b l e  o n  a t  f i v e  
o'clock in the morning, you deserved it." 
"When you talked to me then, it made me realize how little I 
know about what you do," she says. "I wish you had told me 
more over the years." 
I shrug. "I don't know why I haven't, I guess I thought you 
wouldn't want to hear it. Or I didn 't want to burden you with it." 
"Well, I should have asked you more questions," she says. 
"I'm sure I didn't give you many opportunities by working 
those long hours." 
"When you weren't coming home those days before I left, I 
really took it personally," she says. "I couldn't believe it didn't 
have something to do with me. Deep down, I thought you must 
be using it as an excuse to stay away from me." 
"No, absolutely not, Julie. When all those crises were occur- 
ring, I just kept thinking you must know how important they 
were," I tell her. "I'm sorry. I should have told you more." 
She squeezes my hand. 
"I've been thinking about some of the things you said about 
our marriage when we were sitting here last time," she says. "I 
have to say you're right. For a long time, we have just been coast- 
ing along. In fact, we were drifting apart. I've watched you get 
more and more wrapped up in your job as the years have gone 
by. And to compensate for losing you, I got wrapped up in things 
like decorating the house and spending my time with friends. We 
lost sight of what was important." 
I look at her in the sunlight. The awful frosting in her hair 
which she had when I came ho me the day the NCX-10 went 
down is finally gone. It's grown out. Her hair is thick and straight 
again, and all the same dark brown.  
Captured by Plamen T.
261
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementShe says, "Al, the one thing I definitely know now is that I 
want more of you, not less. That's always been the problem for 
me." 
She turns to me with her blue eyes, and I get a long-lost 
feeling about her. 
"I finally figured out why I haven't wanted to go back to 
Bearington with you," she says. "A nd it isn't just the town, al- 
though I don't like it very much th ere. It's that since we've been 
living apart, we've actually spen t more time being together. I 
mean, when we were living in the same house, I felt as though 
you took me for granted. Now you bring me flowers. You go out 
of your way to be with me. You take time to do things with me 
and the kids. Al, it's been nice. I know it can't go on this way 
forever—I think my parents are getting a little tired of the ar- 
rangement—but I haven't wanted it to end." 
I start to feel very good. 
I say, "At least we're sure we  don't want to say good-bye." 
"Al, I don't know exactly what ou r goal is, or ought to be, but 
I think we know there must be some kind of need between us," 
she says. "I know I want Sharon an d  D a v e  t o  g r o w  u p  t o  b e  g o o d  
people. And I want us to give  each other what we need." 
I put my arm around her. 
"For starters, that sounds worth shooting for," I tell her. 
"Look, it's probably easier said th an done, but I can certainly try 
to keep from taking you for gr anted. I'd like you to come home, 
but unfortunately, the pressures that caused all the problems are 
still going to be there. They're ju st not going to go away. I can't 
ignore my job." 
"I've never asked you to," she says. "Just don't ignore me or 
the kids. And I'll really try to understand your work." 
I smile. 
"You remember a long time ago, after we got married and 
we both had jobs, how we'd come  home and just talk to each 
other for a couple of hours, and sympathize with each other 
about the trials and tribulations we'd suffered during the day?" I 
ask. "That was nice." 
"But then there were babies," says Julie. "And, later, you 
started putting in extra hours at work." 
"Yeah, we got out of the habit," I tell her. "What do you say 
we make a point to do that again?" 
"That sounds terrific," she says. "Look, Al, I know that leav- 
Captured by Plamen T.
262
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementing you must have seemed selfish on my part. I just went crazy 
for a little while. I'm sorry— 
"No, you don't have to be sorry," I tell her. "I should have 
been paying attention." 
"But I'll try to make it up to  you," she says. Then she smiles 
briefly and adds, "Since we're walking down memory lane, 
maybe you remember the first fight we had, how we promised 
afterwards we'd always try to look  at a situation from the other's 
point of view as well as our own. Well, I think for the past couple 
of years we haven't been doing that very often. I'm willing to try 
it again if you are." 
"I am too," I say. 
There is a long hug. 
"So . . . you want to get married?" I ask her. 
She leans back in my arms and says, "I'll try anything twice." 
"You know, don't you, it's not going to be perfect," I tell her. 
"You know we're still going to have fights." 
"And I'll probably be selfish about you from time to time," 
she says. 
"What the hell," I tell her, "Let's go to Vegas and find a 
justice of the peace." 
She laughs, "Are you serious?" 
"Well, I can't go tonight," I say. "I've got that meeting in the 
morning. How about tomorrow night?" 
"You are serious!" 
"All I've been doing since you le ft is putting my paycheck in 
the bank. After tomorrow it'll definitely be time to blow some of 
it." 
Julie smiles. "Okay, big spender. Let's do it."  
Captured by Plamen T.
263
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement31 
The next morning on the fifteenth floor of the UniCo build- 
ing, I walk into the conference room at a few minutes before ten 
o'clock. Sitting at the far end of the long table is Hilton Smyth 
and sitting next to him is Neil Cravitz. Flanking them are various 
staff people. 
I say, "Good morning." 
Hilton looks up at me without a smile and says, "If you close 
the door, we can begin." 
"Wait a minute. Bill Peach isn't he re yet," I say. "We're going 
to wait for him, aren't we?" 
"Bill's not coming. He's involved in some negotiations," says 
Smyth. 
"Then I would like this review to be postponed until he's 
available," I tell him. 
Smyth's eyes get steely. 
"Bill specifically told me to conduct this and to pass along my 
recommendation to him," says Smyth. "So if you want to make a 
case for your plant, I suggest you get started. Otherwise, we'll 
have to draw our own conclusions  from your report. And with 
that increase in cost of products Neil has told me about, it sounds 
to me as if you have a little explaining to do. I, for one, would 
particularly like to know why you are not observing proper pro- 
cedures for determining economical batch quantities." 
I pace in front of them a moment before answering. The fuse 
to my anger has started a slow bu rn. I try to put it out and think 
about what this means. I don't lik e the situation one bit. Peach 
damn well ought to be here. And I was expecting to be making my 
presentation to Frost, not his assi stant. But from the sound of it, 
Hilton may have set himself up with Peach to be my judge, jury, 
and possibly, executioner. I decide  the safest bet is to talk. 
"Fine," I say finally. "But before I go into my presentation of 
what has been happening at my plant, let me ask you a question. 
Is it the goal of the UniWare Division to reduce costs?" 
"Of course it is," says Hilton impatiently. 
"No, actually, that is not the goal," I tell them. "The goal of 
UniWare is to make money. Agreed?"  
Captured by Plamen T.
264
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementCravitz sits up in his chai r and says, "That's true." 
Hilton gives me a tentative nod. 
I say, "I'm going to demonstrate to you that regardless of 
what our costs look like accordin g to standard measurements, my 
plant has never been in a better position to make money." 
And so it begins. 
An hour and a half later, I'm midway through an explana- 
tion of the effects of the bottlenecks upon inventory and 
throughput when Hilton stops me. 
"Okay, you've taken a lot of time to tell us all this, and I 
personally can't see the significance," says Hilton. "Maybe at your 
plant you did have a couple of bottlenecks and you discovered 
what they were. Well, I mean bravo and all that, but when I was a 
plant manager we dealt with bottlenecks wandering everywhere." 
"Hilton, we're dealing with fundamental assumptions that 
are wrong," I tell him. 
"I can't see that you're dealin g with anything fundamental," 
says Hilton. "It's at best simp le common sense, and I'm being 
charitable at that." 
"No, it's more than just common sense. Because we're doing 
things every day that are in direct contradiction to the established 
rules most people use in manufacturing," I tell him. 
"Such as?" asks Cravitz. 
"According to the cost-accounting rules that everybody has 
used in the past, we're supposed to balance capacity with demand 
first, then try to maintain the flow," I say. "But instead we 
shouldn't be trying to balance capacity at all; we need excess ca- 
pacity. The rule we should be following is to balance the/ low with 
demand, not the capacity. 
"Two, the incentives we usually offer are based on the as- 
sumption that the level of utilizat ion of any worker is determined 
by his own potential," I tell them. "That's totally false because of 
dependency. For any resource that is not a bottleneck, the level of 
activity from which the system is able to profit is not determined 
by its individual potential but by some other constraint within the 
system." 
Hilton says impatiently, "What's the difference? When some- 
body is working, we're getting use out of him." 
"No,  and  that's  a third assumption that's wrong,"  I  say. 
Captured by Plamen T.
265
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"We've assumed that utilization and activation are the same. Acti- 
vating a resource and utilizing a resource are not synonymous." 
And the argument goes on. 
/ say an hour lost at a bottleneck is an hour out of the entire 
system. Hilton says an hour lost at a bottleneck is just an hour lost 
of that resource. 
I say an hour saved at a non-bottleneck is worthless. Hilton 
says an hour saved at a non-bottleneck is an hour saved at that 
resource. 
"All this talk about bottlenecks," says Hilton. "Bottlenecks 
temporarily limit throughput. Mayb e your plant is proof of that. 
But they have little impact upon inventory." 
"It's completely the opposite, Hilton," I say. "Bottlenecks 
govern both throughput and invent ory. And I'll tell you what my 
plant really has shown: it's proved our performance measure- 
ments are wrong." 
Cravitz drops the pen he's holdi ng and it rolls noisily on the 
table. 
"Then how are we to evaluate the performance of our opera- 
tions?" asks Cravitz. 
"By the bottom line," I tell him.  "And based upon that evalu- 
ation, my plant has now become the best in the UniWare Divi- 
sion, and possibly the best in its industry. We're making money 
when none of the others are." 
"Temporarily you may be making money.  But if you're really 
running your plant this way, I can't possibly see how your plant 
can be profitable for very long," says Hilton. 
I start to speak, but Hilton rais es his voice and talks over me. 
"The fact of the matter is that your cost-of-products mea- 
surement increased," says Hilton. "And when costs go up, profits 
have to go down. It's that simple. And that's the basis of what I'll 
be putting into my report to Bill Peach." 
Afterwards, I find myself alone in the room. Messrs. Smyth 
and Cravitz have gone. I'm staring into my open briefcase—then 
with a fist, I slam it shut. 
I'm muttering to myself something about their pigheaded- 
ness as I exit the conference room and go to the elevators. I press 
the "down" button. But when the el evator arrives, I'm not there. 
I'm walking back up the corridor again, and I'm heading for the 
corner office.  
Captured by Plamen T.
266
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementBill's secretary, Meg, watches me  approach. I stride up to her 
desk, where she's sorting paper clips. 
"I need to see Bill," I tell her. 
"Go right in. He's waiting for you," she says. 
"Hello, Al," he greets me as I enter his office. "I knew you 
wouldn't leave without seeing me. Take a seat." 
As I approach his desk I start to talk, "Hilton Smyth is going 
to submit a negative report about my  plant, and I feel that as my 
manager you should hear me out before you come to any conclu- 
sions." 
"Go ahead, tell me all about it. Sit down, we're not in a 
rush." 
I continue to talk. Bill puts his elbows on the desktop and his 
fingers together in front of his face. When I finally stop he says, 
"And you explained all of this to Hilton?" 
"In great detail." 
"And what was his response?" he asks. 
"He basically refused to listen. He continues to claim that as 
long as cost of products increase , profits eventually have to go 
down." 
Bill looks straight into my eyes and asks, "Don't you think he 
has a point?" 
"No, I don't. As long as I keep my operating expenses under 
control and Johnny Jons is happy, I don't see how profits can 
help but continue to go up." 
"Fine," he says, and buzzes Meg. "Can you call Hilton, Na- 
than, and Johnny Jons in here please." 
"What's going on?" I ask him. 
"Don't worry, just wait and see," he says calmly. 
It's not long before they all enter the room and take seats. 
"Hilton," Bill turns to him, "you heard Alex's report this 
morning. You've also seen all th e financial results. As the produc- 
tivity manager of the division, and as a fellow plant manager, 
what's your recommendation?" 
"I think that Alex should be called to order," he says in a 
formal voice. "And I think that immediate actions should be 
taken in his plant before it's too late. The productivity in Alex's 
plant is deteriorating, cost of products is going up, and proper 
procedures are not being followed. I think that immediate actions 
are in order." 
Ethan Frost clears his throat, and when we all look at him 
Captured by Plamen T.
267
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementhe says, "And what about the fact that in the last two months that 
plant has turned profits rather than losses, while releasing a lot of 
cash for the division?" 
"That is only a temporary phenom enon," Hilton states. "We 
must expect big losses in the very near future." 
"Johnny, do you have anything to add?" Bill asks. 
"Yes, certainly. Alex's plant is the only one that can produce 
miracles—to deliver what the client  needs in a surprisingly short 
time. You've all heard about Burnsi de's visit. With such a plant 
backing up sales, they can really  go out and blast the market." 
"Yes, but at what price?" Hilton  reacts. "Cutting batches to 
far below optimum size. Devoting the entire plant to one order. 
Do you know the long-term ramifications?" 
"But I haven't devoted the plant to one order!" I can't con- 
tain my anger. "As a matter of fact, I haven't got any past-due 
orders. All my clients are pleased." 
"Miracles exist only in fairy tales," Hilton says cynically. 
Nobody says a word. At last I cannot hold back, "So what's 
the verdict—is my plant going to be closed?" 
"No," says Bill. "Not at all. Do you think we're such bad 
managers that we would close a gold mine?" 
I sigh in relief. Only now do I notice I've been holding my 
breath. 
"As manager of productivity of the division," Hilton says 
with a red face, "I feel it's my duty to protest." 
Bill ignores him, and turning to Ethan and Johnny he asks, 
"Shall we tell them now, or wait until Monday?" 
They both laugh. 
"Hilton, this morning I asked you to sit in for me because we 
were meeting with Granby. Two months from now the three of us 
are moving up the ladder, to head the group. Granby left it to us 
to decide who will be the next manager of the division. I think 
that the three of us have decided. Congratulations, Alex; you will 
be the one to replace me." 
When I return to the plant, Fran hands me a message "It's 
from Bill Peach. What's going on?" 
"Call everybody. I have some good news," I smile. 
Bill's message is: "I recommend you use these two months to 
prepare yourself. You still have a lot to learn, hotshot." 
Captured by Plamen T.
268
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementAt last I'm able to reach Jonah in New York and fill him in on 
the latest developments. Although  pleased for me, he does not 
seem surprised. 
"And all this time I just worried about saving my one plant," 
I tell him. "Now it seems that  I'm ending up with three." 
"Good luck," says Jonah. "K eep up the good work." 
Hurriedly, before he hangs up I ask in a desperate voice, 
"I'm afraid that luck will not be enough; I'm out of my depth. 
Can't you come down and help me?" I haven't spent two hours 
tracking down Jonah just to he ar his congratulations. Frankly, 
I'm terrified at the prospect of my new job. It's one thing to 
handle a production plant, but handli ng a division of three plants 
does not mean just three times the work, it also means responsi- 
bility for product design and marketing. 
"Even if I had the time, I don't th ink it's a good idea," I hear 
his disappointing answer. 
"Why not? It seemed to work fine so far." 
"Alex," he says in a stern voice, "as you climb up the ladder 
and your responsibilities grow, you should learn to rely more and 
more on yourself. Asking me to come now will lead to the oppo- 
site; it will increase the dependency." 
I refuse to see his point. "Can't you continue to teach me?" 
"Yes, I can," he answers. "But first you should find out ex- 
actly what it is that you want to learn. Call me then." 
I don't give up easily. "I want to learn how to run an efficient 
division, isn't it obvious?" 
"In the past you wanted to learn how to run an efficient 
plant," Jonah sounds impatient. "Now you want to learn how to 
run an efficient division. We both know that it will not end here. 
What is it that you want to learn? Can you spell it out?" 
"Actually, I guess that I want  to learn how to manage—a 
plant, a division, a company, any type or size organization." After 
a second of hesitation I add, "It wouldn't be bad to learn how to 
m a n a g e  m y  l i f e ,  b u t  I ' m  a f r a i d  t h a t  w o u l d  b e  a s k i n g  f o r  t o o  
much." 
"Why too much?" says Jonah to my surprise. "I think that 
every sensible person should want to learn how to manage his or 
her life." 
"Great, when can we start?" I ask eagerly. 
"Now. Your first assignment is to find out what techniques 
are needed for effective management."  
Captured by Plamen T.
269
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"What?" I ask in a choked voice. 
"Come on, I didn't ask you to develop them, just to deter- 
mine clearly what they should be. Call me when you have the 
answer. And Alex, congratulations on your promotion." 
Captured by Plamen T.
270
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement32 
"I'm really proud of you. Three more steps like that and we 
will have made it. Shall we drink to it?" 
Julie's forced enthusiasm strikes a responding chord inside 
me. "No, I don't think so." I refuse  the toast, an event which, as 
you can imagine, is not very common. 
Julie doesn't say a word. She just slowly lowers her drink, 
leans slightly forward, and looks directly into my eyes. It's quite 
apparent that she is waitin g for some explanation. 
Under the pressure I start to talk slowly, trying to verbalize 
my rambling thoughts. "Julie, I really don't think that we should 
toast it, at least not in the way yo u make it sound, like toasting an 
empty victory. Somehow I feel that you were right all along— 
what is this promotion if not just winning a point in the rat race?" 
"Hmm," is her only response. 
My wife can express herself ve ry clearly without even open- 
ing her mouth—which is definitely not the case for me. Here I 
am, rambling all over the place . . . 'Rat race' . . . 'Empty vic- 
tory.' What on earth am I talkin g about? But still, why do I feel 
it's inappropriate to toast my promotion? 
"The family paid too big a price for this promotion," I finally 
say. 
"Alex you're being too hard on  yourself. This crisis was 
about to explode one way or the other." 
She continues, "I gave it a lot of thought and let's face it, if 
you had given up, the feeling of failure would have spoiled every 
good part of our marriage. I think you should be proud of this 
promotion. You didn't step on anybody to get it; you won it fair 
and square." 
A chill goes down my back as I remember it. I was in deep 
trouble. My plant was under a real threat of being closed down; 
over six hundred people were about to join the already long un- 
employment lines; my career was one inch from being kissed by 
limbo; and on top of all that, the unbelievable hours I was putting 
in at work had pushed our marriage to the brink of going down 
the tube. In short, I was about to change from a bright, rising star 
into an ordinary bum.  
Captured by Plamen T.
271
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementBut I didn't give up. Against all odds I continued to fight. 
And I was not alone. Jonah introduced me to his common-sense 
(and thus very controversial) approach to managing a company. 
I t  m a d e  a  l o t  o f  s e n s e ,  s o  m y  t e am enthusiastically backed me up. 
And it was fun, real fun. Let me tell you, the last few months were 
quite stormy. I think that we violat ed almost every rule of corpo- 
rate America. But we made it. We turned the plant around. So 
much so that it saved the entire division. Now, Julie and I are 
sitting in this fancy restaurant celebrating. I'm going to head the 
division, which means relocation—a fact that probably contrib- 
utes a lot to Julie's supportive mood. 
Raising my glass I say confidentl y, "Julie, let's drink to my 
promotion. Not as a step toward the tip of the pyramid, but let's 
drink to what it really means—positive reassurance to our excit- 
ing, worthwhile journey." 
A broad smile is spreading over Julie's face and our glasses 
make a clear, gentle sound. 
We turn to our menus, in a good mood. "It's your celebra- 
tion as much as it is mine," I say generously. After a while, and in 
a more somber tone I continue, "Actually, it's much more Jonah's 
achievement than mine." 
"You know Alex, it's so typical of you," Julie says apparently 
disturbed. "You worked so hard and now you want to give the 
credit to somebody else?" 
"Julie, I'm serious. Jonah is the one who gave me all the 
answers, I was just the instrument . As much as I would like to 
think otherwise, that's the plain, bare truth." 
"No, it's far from the truth." 
I turn nervously in my chair, "But . .  ." 
"Alex, stop this nonsense," Julie says in a firm voice. "Artifi- 
cial modesty doesn't suit you." She raises her hand to prevent me 
from answering and firmly continues, "Nobody handed you solu- 
tions on a silver platter. Tell me , Mr. Rogo, how many nights did 
you sweat until you succeeded in finding the answers?" 
"Quite a few," I admit with a smile. 
"You see!" Julie tries to close the subject. 
"No, I don't see," I laugh. "I'm  very well aware that Jonah 
didn't simply give me the answers. As a matter of fact, during 
those long nights, (and days), considerable time was spent cursing 
him for just that. But, come on, Julie, the fact that he elected to 
Captured by Plamen T.
272
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementpresent them in the form of very pointed questions doesn't 
change a thing." 
Rather than continuing, Julie calls the waiter and starts to 
order. She's right. This line of di scussion will just ruin a pleasant 
evening. 
It's not until I'm busy with my delicious veal parmesan that 
my thoughts start to crystallize. What was the nature of the an- 
swers, the solutions, that Jonah caused us to develop? They all 
had one thing in common. They a ll made common sense, and at 
the same time, they flew directly in  the face of everything I'd ever 
learned. Would we have had the courage to try to implement 
them if it weren't for the fact that we'd had to sweat to construct 
them? Most probably not. If it weren't for the conviction that we 
gained in the struggle—for the ownership that we developed in 
the process—I don't think we'd ac tually have had the guts to put 
our solutions into practice. 
Still deep in thought, I raise my eyes from the plate and 
examine Julie's face. It's as if sh e was waiting for me all this time. 
"How come you didn't think of it yourselves?" I hear her 
asking. "To me your answers look like plain, common sense. Why 
couldn't you do it without Jonah's guiding questions?" 
"Good question, very good question. Frankly, I doubt I 
know the answer." 
"Alex, don't tell me you ha ven't thought about it." 
"Yes, I have," I admit. "All of us, back in the plant, had the 
same question. The solutions look trivial, but the fact is that for 
years we've done the exact opposite. Moreover, the other plants 
still insist on sticking to the ol d, devastating ways. Probably Mark 
Twain was right saying that 'co mmon sense is not common at all' 
or something similar." 
"That's not an answer to my que stion." She doesn't let me off 
the hook. 
"Just bear with me," I plead. "I really don't know. I'm not 
sure that I even know the meaning of'common sense'. What do 
you think we mean when we refer to something as 'common 
sense'?" 
"It's unfair to answer a quest ion with a question." She re- 
fuses my apparent attempt to turn the table. 
"Why not?" I try again. 
She doesn't allow her lips to move.  
Captured by Plamen T.
273
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Okay," I give up. "The best that  I  h a v e  c o m e  u p  w i t h  s o  f a r  
is to recognize that we refer to something as common sense only 
if it is in line with our own intuition." 
She nods her head in approval. 
"Which only helps to intensify your question," I continue. "It 
only means that when we recogn ize something as common sense, 
it must be that, at least intuitiv ely, we knew it all along. Why is 
there so often the need for an exte rnal trigger to help us realize 
something that we already knew intuitively?" 
"That was my question!" 
"Yes, darling, I know. Probably these intuitive conclusions 
are masked by something else, something that's not common 
sense." 
"What could that be?" 
"Probably common practice." 
"Makes sense," she smiles and turns to finish her dinner. 
"I must admit," I say after a while, "that Jonah's way of lead- 
ing to the answers through asking questions, his 'Socratic ap- 
proach,' is very effective at peeling away the layers—the thick 
layers—of common practice. I tried to explain the answers to 
others, who needed them as badly as we did, but got nowhere. As 
a matter of fact, if it hadn't b een for Ethan Frost's appreciation 
of our improvements to the botto m line, my approach might have 
led to some very undesirable results. 
"You know," I continue, "it's amazing how deeply ingrained 
those things are that we've been told and practiced, but never 
spent the time to think about on our own. 'Don't give the an- 
swers, just ask the questi ons!' I'll have to practice that." 
Julie doesn't look too enthused. 
"What's the matter?" I ask. 
"Nothing," she says. 
' 'Don't give the answers,' definitely makes sense," I try to 
convince her. "Spelling out the answers when you are trying to 
convince someone who blindly follows the common practice is 
totally ineffective. Actually ther e are only two possibilities, either 
you are not understood, or you are understood." 
"You don't say?" 
"In the first case, no real harm has been done, people are 
just going to ignore you. The second case might be much worse, 
people might understand you. They'll take your message as 
something worse than criticism."  
Captured by Plamen T.
274
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"What is worse than criticism?" she asks innocently . 
"Constructive criticism." I smile gloomily, remembering the 
harsh responses of Hilton Smyth and that Cravitz fellow. "You 
have a point, but it's below the belt. People will never forgive you 
for that." 
"Alex, you don't have to convince me that when I want to 
persuade somebody—especially my husband—that giving an- 
swers is not the way. I'm simply  not convinced that only asking 
questions is much better." 
I think about it. She is right. Whenever I tried just to ask 
questions it was interpreted as patr onizing, or even worse, that I 
was simply negative. 
"It looks like one should think twice before charging the tall 
windmills of common practi ce." I conclude gloomily. 
Julie busies herself with the delicious cheesecake our waiter 
is placing in front of us. I do the same. 
When the coffee's served I gather enough stamina to con- 
tinue the conversation. "Julie, is it really so bad? I don't recall 
giving you a lot of grief." 
"Are you kidding? Not only are you stubborn like a Southern 
mule, you had to go and pass on these genes to your kids. I bet 
you gave Jonah a hard time as well." 
I think about it for a short while. "No Julie, with Jonah 
somehow it was different. You s ee, whenever I'm talking with 
Jonah, I have the distinct feeling t hat not only is he ready with his 
questions, he's also ready with my questions. It must be that the 
Socratic method is much more than just asking questions. One 
thing I can tell you, improvising with this method is hazardous, 
believe me, I've tried. It's like throwing a sharpened boomer- 
ang." 
T h e n  i t  d a w n s  o n  m e .  H e r e ' s  the answer. This is the tech- 
nique that I should ask Jonah to teach me: how to persuade other 
people, how to peel away the layers of common practice, how to 
overcome the resistance to change. 
I tell Julie about my last teleph one conversation with Jonah. 
"That's very interesting," she says at last. "You definitely 
need to learn how to manage your life better. But sweetheart," 
she laughs, "be careful, remember what happened to Socrates. 
He was forced to drink poison." 
"I don't intend to give Jonah any poison," I say, still very 
excited. "Julie, let me tell yo u, whenever Jonah and I talked 
Captured by Plamen T.
275
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementabout my troubles at the plant, I always felt he anticipated my 
response. It actually bothere d me for quite some time." 
"Why?" 
"When did he have the time to learn so much? I'm not talk- 
ing about theories, I'm talking about his intimate understanding 
of how the wheels are really turning in a plant. As far as I know, 
he never worked one day of his life in industry. He's a physicist. I 
can't believe that a scientist, sitting  in his ivory tower, can know so 
much about the detailed realitie s of the shop floor. Something 
doesn't match. 
"Alex, if that's the case, it seems that you should ask Jonah to 
teach you something more than just the Socratic method." 
Captured by Plamen T.
276
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement33 
Lou is my first and most important target. If I'm unable to 
persuade him to join me, I'm basically lost. It's not going to be 
easy. He's very close to retirement  and I know to what extent he's 
involved in his community. I take a deep breath and walk into his 
office. "Hey Lou, is it a good time?" 
"Good as any. How can I help you?" 
Perfect opening, but somehow I don't have the guts to go 
straight to the point. "I was just wondering about your forecast 
for the next two months," I say. "Do you see any problem in us 
reaching and maintaining the fifteen percent net profit? Not that 
it's crucial any more," I hurriedly add, "but I'd hate giving 
Hilton Smyth even the slightest open ing to hiss, 'I told you so.' ' 
"You can sleep tight. According to  my calculations we'll easily 
cross the twenty percent net profit for the next two months." 
"What!" I can hardly believe my  ears. "Lou, what's the mat- 
ter with you? Since when do yo u believe marketing's chronically 
optimistic outlook?" 
"Alex, a lot has happened to me  recently, but believing mar- 
keting is not one of them. Actually, my forecast is based on a 
slight decline in incoming orders." 
"So how did you pull this rabbit out of your hat?" 
"Have a seat, it'll take me some time to explain. I have some- 
thing important to tell you," he says. 
It's clear that I'm going to hear about another devious ac- 
counting trick. "All right, let's hear it." 
I make myself comfortable while Lou shuffles papers. After 
two minutes I lose my patience, "Well, Lou?" 
"Alex, we blamed the distorted way in which product costs 
are calculated for giving the appearance that our net profit was 
only twelve point eight percent, rather than over seventeen per- 
cent as we believed was the case. I know that you were furious 
about it, but what I've found out is that there's an even bigger 
accounting distortion. It's tied to the way that we evaluate inven- 
tory, but it's hard for me to explain. Maybe I'll try to do it 
through the balance sheet." 
He pauses again. This time I wait patiently.  
Captured by Plamen T.
277
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Maybe I should start with a question," he says . "Do you 
agree that inventory is a liability?" 
"Of course, everybody knows that . And even if we didn't 
know it, the last few months have shown to what extent inventory 
is a liability. Do you think we could have pulled off this fast re- 
sponse to orders if the floor had been as jammed up as before? 
And haven't you noticed that quality has improved, and overtime 
has gone down—not to mention that we hardly ever have to ex- 
pedite today!" 
"Yeah," he says, still looking at his papers. "Inventory is defi- 
nitely a liability, but under what heading are we forced to report 
it on the balance sheet?" 
"Holy cow, Lou!" I jump to my feet. "I knew that the finan- 
cial measurements were remote from reality, but to that extent— 
to report liabilities under the heading of assets? I never realized 
the full implications . . . Tell me, what are the bottom line 
ramifications?" 
"Bigger than you think, Alex. I've checked and rechecked it, 
but the numbers do talk. You see, we're evaluating inventory ac- 
cording to the cost to produce th e goods. These costs include not 
only the money we pay for the raw materials, but also the value 
added in production. 
"You know what we have done in the last few months. Dono- 
van has worked only on things that  we have orders for. Stacey has 
released material accordingly. We've drained about fifty percent 
of the work in process from the plant, and about twenty-five per- 
cent from finished goods. We've saved a lot by not purchasing 
new materials to replace this exce ss inventory, and the cash fig- 
ures show it clearly. But on ou r books, the assets represented by 
inventory went down, since they were only partially compensated 
for by the cash we didn't have to pay out. In this period, when we 
were reducing inventory, all the difference between the product 
cost and the material cost of th e reduced inventory showed up as 
a net loss." 
I swallow hard. "Lou, you're te lling me that we were penal- 
ized for doing the right thing? That reducing the excess inven- 
tory was interpreted by our books as a loss?" 
"Yes," he replies, still looking at his papers. 
"Well tell me, what was the impact—in numbers?" 
"Our actual net profit was well over twenty percent in each 
of the last three months," he says flatly.  
Captured by Plamen T.
278
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementI stare at him. I can't believe my ears. 
"But look at the good side," he says sheepishly, "now that the 
inventory has stabilized at a new, low level, this effect won't dis- 
turb us any longer." 
"Thank you very much," I say sa rcastically and turn to leave. 
When I reach the door I turn around and ask him, "When 
did you discover this phenomena? When did you find out that we 
were turning much more profit than the targeted fifteen per- 
cent?" 
"A week ago." 
"So why didn't you tell me? I could have used these facts 
very effectively in the plant review." 
"No Alex, you couldn't have used them at all, it just would 
have confused your story. You see, everyone evaluates inventory 
this way, it's even required by the tax authorities. You didn't 
stand a chance. But I did discuss it at length with Ethan Frost; 
he understood it perfectly." 
"So that's what happened, you fox. Now I understand why 
Ethan became so supportive," I say, sitting back down. 
When we've finished grinning at each other, Lou says in a 
quiet voice, "Alex, I have another issue." 
"Another bomb?" 
"You might call it that, but it's sort of a personal matter. 
Ethan told me that he's going with Bill Peach to the group. I 
know that you will need a good divisional controller, someone 
who has experience in the more diverse subjects that are dealt 
with at the division level. I'm just one year from retirement; ev- 
erything that I know is old-fashioned. So ..." 
Here it comes, I say to myself. I must stop him before he 
states that he doesn't want to come with me. Once he says it, it'll 
be much harder to change his mind. 
"Lou, wait," I interrupt him. "Look at the work that we've 
done in the last few mont hs. Don't you think . . ." 
"That's exactly what I was abou t to bring up," he interrupts 
me in turn. "Look at it from my point of view. All my life I've 
gathered numbers and compiled reports. I've seen myself as 
somebody who has to supply the data, as an impartial, objective 
observer. But the last few months have shown me to what extent 
I was wrong. I wasn't an objective observer; I was following, al- 
most blindly, some erroneous procedures without understanding 
the far-reaching, devastating ramifications.  
Captured by Plamen T.
279
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"I've given it a lot of thought lately. We need financial mea- 
surements for sure—but we don't need them for their own sake. 
We need them for two different reasons. One is control; knowing 
to what extent a company is achieving its goal of making money. 
The other reason is probably even more important; measure- 
ments should induce the parts to do what's good for the organiza- 
tion as a whole. What's become appa rent to me is that neither of 
these two objectives is being met. 
"For example, this conversation we just had. We knew very 
well that the plant had drastically improved, but the distorted 
measurements have almost condem ned us. I'm submitting effi- 
ciency reports, product-cost reports, and now we both know to 
what extent they just lead workers and management alike to do 
what's bad for the company." 
I've never heard Lou talk for so long. I agree with every- 
thing he just said, but I'm totally confused. I don't know what 
he's getting at. 
"Alex, I can't stop here. I can't retire now. Do me a personal 
favor, take me with you. I want  the opportunity to devise a new 
measurement system, one that'll co rrect the system we have now, 
so that it will do what we expect it to do. So that a controller can 
be proud of his job. I don't know if I'll succeed, but at least give 
me the chance." 
What am I supposed to say? I stand up and stretch out my 
hand. "It's a deal." 
Back at my desk I ask Fran to call Bob Donovan in. With Lou 
on one side and Bob on the other, I'll be free to concentrate on 
the two areas I know the least,  engineering and marketing. 
What am I going to do about marketing? The only person I 
appreciate in that department is Johnny Jons; no wonder Bill has 
decided to take him along. 
The phone rings. It's Bob. 
"Hey Al, I'm sitting with Stacey and Ralph, we're really cook- 
ing. Can you join us?" 
"How long will it take?" I ask. 
"No way to tell. Probably 'til the end of the day." 
"In that case, I'll pass. But Bob,  we need to talk. Can you get 
away for a few minutes?" 
"Sure, no problem." 
And in no time, he enters my office. "What's up, boss?" 
Captured by Plamen T.
280
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementI decide to give it to him straight, "How'd you like to be 
responsible for all production of the division?" 
The only thing he manages to say is a long "Wow." He puts 
his big body in a chair, looks at me, and doesn't say any more. 
"Well, Bob, surprised?" 
"You bet." 
I go to pour us coffee and he starts to talk to my back. "Alex, 
I don't want that job. Not now. You know, a month ago I would 
have grabbed the offer with both hands. It's way beyond what I 
expected." 
Puzzled, I turn around, a cup in each hand. "What's the 
matter Bob, afraid?" 
"You know better than that." 
"So what happened in the past month to change your per- 
spective?" 
"Burnside." 
"You mean he made you a better offer?" 
He fills the room with his booming laughter. "No, Alex, 
nothing like that. What gave me a new perspective was the way 
we handled Burnside's urgent order. I learned so much from 
how we handled that case that I wo uld rather stay in this plant 
and develop it further." 
Surprises all around me. I thought I knew these people. I 
expected it would be impossible to convince Lou, and he almost 
begged me for the job. I didn't expect any problems with Bob, 
and he just declined my of fer. It's really annoying. 
"You'd better explain," I hand him his cup. 
Bob's chair squeaks in protest as he fidgets. If I were staying 
here longer, I would have ordered a more massive chair just for 
him. 
"Haven't you noticed how unique the events of Burnside's 
order were?" he says at last. 
"Yes, of course. I've never heard of the president of a com- 
pany going to thank the workers of a vendor." 
"Yeah, yeah, that too. But look at the whole chain of events. 
Johnny called you with an impossible client wish. He didn't be- 
lieve it could be done, and neit her did the client. And on the 
surface, it was impossible. But we looked into it. We considered 
the bottleneck availability, we c onsidered the vendor limitations, 
and we came back with so mething pretty unusual. 
"We didn't say a flat no, or a flat yes, and then miss the due 
Captured by Plamen T.
281
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementdate by a mile, as we used to do. We re-engineered the deal; we 
came back with a counter-offer that was feasible and that the 
client liked even more than his original request." 
"Yes," I say, "it was good work. Especially considering what 
came out after that. But that was a peculiar set of circumstances." 
"It was peculiar because normally we don't take the initiative 
—but maybe there's a way to make it standard. Don't you see? We 
actually engineered a sale. We—in the plant, in production—en- 
gineered a sale." 
I think about it. He's right. Now I start to see where he's 
heading. 
Bob, probably misinterpreting my silence, says, "For you it's 
not a big deal, you always looked at production and sales as two 
links in the same chain. But look  at me. All the time I'm buried 
out on the shop floor, thinking that my responsibility is to put out 
fires, and viewing the sales department as snake oil salesmen, 
spreading unrealistic promises to our clients. For me, this event 
was a revelation. 
"Look, we give sales a rigid lead time for each product. So if 
it's not in finished goods, thos e are the numbers they should use 
to promise to clients. Yeah, they deviate from it, but not by much. 
Maybe there should be another way. Maybe the quoted lead times 
should be done case by case, according to the load on the bottle- 
necks. And maybe we shouldn't re gard the quantities required as 
if we have to supply them in one shot. 
"Alex, I'd like to look into it  more. Actually, that's what 
Stacey, Ralph, and I are doing ri ght now. We were looking for 
you, you should join us. It's pretty exciting." 
It certainly sounds it, but I can't allow myself to get sucked in 
right now. I have to continue with  preparations for my next job. 
"Tell me again what you ar e up to," I finally say. 
"We want to make production a dominant force in getting 
good sales. Sales which will fit both the client's needs and the 
plant's capabilities like a glove. Exactly as we did in Burnside's 
case. But you see, for that I have to be here, in the plant. As long 
as we don't understand it in full, as long we don't develop the 
new procedures, we have to be intimately involved with all the 
details." 
"So what you want to do is to find those procedures. I see. 
This is interesting—but Bob, that 's not like you. Since when have 
you been interested in such things?"  
Captured by Plamen T.
282
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Since you came and forced us to rethink the way we were 
doing stuff. Do you think somebody needs better proof than 
what's happened here in the pas t months? Here we were, run- 
ning things like we'd always done it—by the seat of our pants, 
slowly but surely sinking. And then we took the time and re- 
examined it from basic principles . And look at how many sacred 
cows we've had to slaughter! Worker efficiency—whoops, out the 
window. Optimum batch sizes—there it goes. Releasing work just 
because we have the material and the people—that's gone as well. 
And I can go on and on. But look at  the result. If I hadn't seen it 
myself, I wouldn't believe it. 
"Yeah, Alex, I want to stay here and continue what you've 
started. I want to be the new plant manager. You caused us to 
change almost every rule in production. You forced us to view 
production as a means to satisfy sales. I want to change the role 
production is playing in getting sales." 
"Fine with me. But Bob, when  you nail those procedures," 
and to myself I add, 'if/ "will you consider taking on responsibil- 
ity for all the plants in the division?" 
"You bet, boss. I'll teach 'em a trick or two." 
"Let's drink to it," I say. And we toast with our coffee. 
"Who do you suggest should take your place?" I ask him. 
"Frankly, I'm not impressed with any of your superintendents." 
"Unfortunately, I agree with yo u. The best would be Stacey, 
but I don't give it much chance she'd take it." 
"Why don't we ask her. You know what? Let's call both 
Stacey and Ralph in and discuss your idea." 
"So, at last you found him," St acey says to Bob, as she and 
Ralph enter the room, each loaded with papers. 
"Yes, Stacey," I answer. "And it definitely looks like a promis- 
ing idea. But before that, there's another thing that we'd like to 
discuss with you. We've just agreed  that Bob will take my place as 
plant manager. How about you taking his place as production 
manager?" 
"Congratulations, Bob." They bo th shake his hand. "That's 
no surprise." 
Since Stacey hasn't answered my question, I continue, 
"Think about it, you don't have to  answer now. We know that you 
love your job and that you don't want the burden of all the per- 
Captured by Plamen T.
283
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementsonnel problems that go with being a production manager, but 
we both think that you'd do a fantastic job." 
"You bet," Bob adds his two cents. 
She looks calmly at me, and sa ys, "Last night I was lying in 
bed, praying. I was praying that th is job would be offered to me." 
"Done," Bob shouts quickly. 
"Now that you've accepted," I say to Stacey, "can you tell us 
why you want this job so badly?" 
"Looks like being a material manager," Bob booms, "is start- 
ing to be boring around this plant—not enough expediting, not 
enough rush calls. ... I didn't know that you liked that type of 
excitement." 
"No, I didn't, and I don't. Th at's why I was so happy with 
our new method, timing the release of material according to the 
bottlenecks' consumption. But you know my fear, what happens 
if new bottlenecks pop up? 
"What my people and I have done is to examine daily the 
queues in front of the assembly and in front of the bottlenecks— 
we call them 'buffers.' We check ju st to be sure that everything 
that's scheduled to be worked on is there—that there are no 
'holes.' We thought that if a new bottleneck pops up it would 
immediately show up as a hole in at least one of these buffers. It 
took us some time to perfect this technique, but now it's working 
smoothly. 
"You see, whenever there's a hole in a buffer—and I'm not 
talking about just the work that's  supposed to be  done on a given 
day, but the work for two or th ree days down the road—we go 
and check in which work center the materials are stuck. And 
then . . ." 
"And then you expedite!" Bob jumps in. 
"No, nothing of the sort. We don't break setups, or light a 
fire. We just point out to the foreman of that work center which 
job we would prefer he gets to next." 
"That's very interesting," I say. 
"Yeah. And it became even more interesting when we real- 
ized that we were visiting the same six or seven work centers 
every time. They're not bottlenecks, but the sequence in which 
they perform their jobs became very important. We call them 
'capacity constraint reso urces,' CCR for short." 
"Yeah, I know all about it. Those foremen have become al- 
Captured by Plamen T.
284
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementmost dependent on your people to  prioritize their work," Bob 
says. "But Stacey, you're not answering our question." 
"I'm coming to it. See, thes e holes have become more and 
more dangerous lately—sometimes to the extent that assembly 
has to deviate significantly from their scheduled sequence. And 
it's become apparent that the foremen of the CCRs have more 
and more difficulty supplying on time. Ralph was telling me that 
these work centers still have enough capacity, and maybe on the 
average he's right, but I'm afraid  that any additional increase in 
sales will throw us into chaos." 
So here's a bomb, ticking below our feet, and I didn't even 
realize it. I'm pressing so hard on marketing to bring more sales, 
and according to what Stacey's just revealed that might blow up 
the whole plant. I'm still trying to digest it when she continues. 
"Don't you realize that we've concentrated our improvement 
efforts too narrowly? We tried so hard to improve our bottle- 
necks, when what we should do is improve the CCRs as well. 
Otherwise we'll run into an 'int er-active' bottleneck situation. 
"See, the key is not in the hands of the materials people. If 
interactive bottlenecks emerge, chao s is inevitable; we'll have to 
expedite all over the place." 
"So what are you suggesting?" I ask. 
"The key is in the hands of production. These techniques to 
manage the buffers should not be used just to track missing parts 
while there is still time, they shou ld be used mainly to focus our 
local improvement efforts. We mu st guarantee that the improve- 
ments on the CCRs will always be sufficient to prevent them from 
becoming bottlenecks. 
"Alex, Bob, that's why I want this job so badly. I want to 
make sure that the material m anager's job will continue to be 
boring. I want to demonstrate ho w local improvements should be 
managed. And I want to show all of you how much more 
throughput we can squeeze from the same resources." 
"What about you Ralph, it's yo ur turn to surprise me." 
"What do you mean?" he says in his quiet voice. 
"It looks like everyone around here has a pet project. What 
ace are you hiding up your sleeve?" 
He smiles gently, "No aces, just a wish." 
We all look at him encouragingly. 
"I've started to like my job. I feel like I'm part of a team." 
Captured by Plamen T.
285
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementWe all nod in approval. 
"It's not just me and the computer anymore, trying to fiddle 
with inaccurate or untimely data. People really need me now, and 
I feel like I'm contributing. But you know what? I think that the 
change, at least as it relates to my function, is very fundamental. 
What I'm holding in my files is data. What you are usually asking 
for is information. I always regarded information as those sec- 
tions of the data which are needed  in order to make a decision— 
and for that, let me admit it, for most decisions my data was 
simply unsuitable. Remember the time we were trying to find the 
bottlenecks?" He looks at each of us in turn. "It took me four 
days to admit that I simply couldn't find the answer. What I 
started to realize is that inform ation is something else. Informa- 
tion is the answer to the question asked. The more I am able to 
do it, the more a part of the team I become. 
"This bottleneck concept has really helped me to move along 
these lines. Let's face it, today the plant obeys a schedule that's 
. released from the computer. 
"What's my wish, you ask? I want to develop a system that'll 
help in what Bob wants to do, that  will help to shrink drastically 
the time and effort needed to engineer a sale, as he calls it. I want 
to develop a system to help St acey manage the buffers, and even 
to help in managing the local improvements. I want to develop a 
system to help Lou measure, in a much more beneficial way, the 
local performance. You see, like everyone else, I have my 
dreams." 
Captured by Plamen T.
286
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement34 
It's quite late, the kids are already fast asleep. Julie and I are 
sitting in the kitchen; we're each holding a warm cup of tea in our 
hands. I tell her about what happ ened today at the plant. She 
seems to be more than mildly interested; she actually claims that 
she finds it fascinating. 
I love it. Rehashing the day's ev ents with Julie really helps 
me to digest it all. 
"So what do you think?" I ask her at last. 
"I'm starting to see what Jonah meant when he warned you 
about increasing the dependency," she replies. 
That makes me think for a while, but I still can't see the 
connection. "What do you mean?" 
"Maybe I'm wrong, but you ga ve me the impression that 
you're not too sure that Lou'll be able to come up with a good, 
new measurement system." 
"That's right," I smile. 
"Is a new measurement system important for you?" 
"Are you kidding? I don't know of another single thing 
which is as important as that." 
"So if it weren't for Jonah's refusal to continue giving you 
pointed questions, am I right in assuming that you'd be on the 
phone right now, trying to s queeze more hints from him?" 
"Most probably," I admit. "It's certainly important enough." 
"And what about Bob's idea," she continues. "Do you regard 
that as something important?" 
"If he pulls it off it'll be a revolution. It'll guarantee that we 
take a big share of the market. De finitely our problem with get- 
ting more sales will be over." 
"And how much hope do you have that he'll be able to do 
it?" 
"Not much, I'm afraid. Ah. I see your point. Yeah, I would 
have run to Jonah with these quest ions as well. And the same with 
the issues that Stacey and Ralph ha ve raised, each one of them is 
essential." 
"And how many more things will pop up when you start to 
manage the division?"  
Captured by Plamen T.
287
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"You're right, Julie. And Jonah is also right. I felt it today as 
well. When each one of them spelled out their immediate dream 
in such a tangible form, I wondered what mine is. The only thing 
that kept popping into my mind is  that I must learn how to man- 
age. But where on earth am I goin g to find the answer to Jonah's 
question: What are the techniques needed for management? I 
don't know, Julie. What do you think I should do now?" 
"All the people back at the plant owe you a lot," she says, 
stroking my hair. "They're proud of you, and rightfully so. 
You've created quite a team. But this team is going to be broken 
up in two months when we go to the division. Why don't you 
spend the time that's left sittin g with them and going over your 
question. They'll have ample time after you're gone to work on 
their problems. Anyhow, it'll be mu ch easier for them to achieve 
what they want to achieve if you have the management tech- 
niques." 
I look at her in silence. Here is my real, true advisor. 
So I've done what my advisor suggested. I gathered them all 
together and explained that if ea ch of them wants to be free to 
concentrate on his pet project the division must be well run, and 
in order for the division to be well run the division manager must 
know what he is doing. And since I, frankly, don't have the foggi- 
est idea of how to run a division they had better put their brains 
to helping me. Thus, we are going to devote the afternoons— 
provided of course that no special emergency comes up—to help 
me analyze how the division should be run. 
I decide to start the meeting with the most naive questions. 
Initially they might think that I've lost all my self confidence, but 
I must expose to them the magn itude of the problem I'm about 
to face. Otherwise I'm going to en d up, at best, with some frag- 
mented, vague suggestions. 
"What are the first things I should do when I assume my 
new position?" I ask them. 
They look at each other, and then Bob says, "I'd start by 
visiting Hilton Smyth's plant." 
After the laughter dies, Lou says that I should first meet with 
my staff; "you know most of them but you've never worked 
closely with them." 
"What is the purpose of these meetings?" I innocently ask. 
Captured by Plamen T.
288
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementIf this question had been asked under any other circum- 
stances they would have taken it as  a clear indication of a total 
lack of managerial knowledge. As it is they play the game. 
"Basically you should do general fact finding first," Lou an- 
swers. 
"You know," Bob adds, "like where the entrance is, where 
the toilets are . . ." 
"I do think that meeting the people is important," Stacey 
interrupts the laughter. "Financial numbers only reveal a small 
fraction of the picture. You have to find out what the people 
think is going on. What do they see as problems? Where do we 
stand vis-a-vis the clients?" 
"Who has a grudge against whom?" Bob contributes, and 
then in a more serious tone. "You also have to get a sense of the 
local politics." 
"And then?" 
"And then," Bob continues. "I'd probably take a tour of the 
various production facilities, visit some of the big clients, and 
probably even some suppliers. You' ve got to get the full picture." 
Maintaining my poker fa ce I ask, "And then?" 
At last I've succeeded to provoke them, since both Stacey and 
Bob answer vehemently, "And then  you'll take it from there!" 
How easy it is to give advice when the responsibility is on 
someone else's shoulders. Okay wise guys, it's time to turn the 
table, and in a calm voice I say, "Yes, what you suggested just now 
is the usual line of action one takes when he is told to 'go there 
and fix it.' Let me play it back for you, but in a more schematic 
way. Where are the colored markers?" 
I grab a red marker and turn to the white board. 
"The first step, as you all have pointed out, is fact finding. I 
hold a staff meeting and what do I find? Oh, here we find fact A," 
and I draw a nice red circle. "And here are three somewhat 
smaller circles. And here is a tiny one and there are two which are 
overlapping. Now let's talk with another manager, this is very 
helpful. You see, this circle, he claims, is not as big as we were led 
to believe. And here, in the left upper corner are two more big- 
gies. Now, someone else reveals to us that some rectangles exist. 
We check, and yes, he's right. Here there is one and here and 
here and here. We're making progress, the picture starts to un- 
fold." 
What they actually see is how the white board is getting the 
Captured by Plamen T.
289
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementmeasles. It looks like one of the drawings my kids used to bring 
home from kindergarten. 
I don't think they got the message, they just seem confused; 
so I decide to continue a little mo re bluntly. "It's about time to 
talk with another manager, we must  get a sense of the local poli- 
tics. Oh, this is very interesting,  there are also green circles, and 
even some green stars. Here's an unidentified shape—never 
mind, we'll address it later. Now,  let's tour the production facili- 
ties, visit clients, and even some  suppliers. We're bound to reveal 
many more interesting facts." As I talk the board is filled with 
overlapping shapes. 
" N o w  t h a t  w e  h a v e  t h e  f u l l  p i c t u r e ,  w e  c a n  t a k e  i t  f r o m  
here," I finally conclude and put the markers down. "Well?" 
The board looks like a nightmare in Technicolor. I take a 
deep breath and pick up the phone to order more coffee. 
Nobody says a word, not even Bob. 
"Let's make it less personal," I say after a while. "Suppose 
that we are a committee that's been given the ungrateful task of 
'find out what's going on.' How do you suggest we should start?" 
They all smile. Somehow pretending that we're a committee 
makes us feel much better. "The safety of being part of a herd," I 
think to myself; the blame will not be aimed at anyone in particu- 
lar. 
"Ralph, will you volunteer to describe the committee's ac- 
tions?" 
"They would probably start in the same way—fact finding. 
And as you so vividly demonstr ated, they would end up in the 
same colorful ditch. But Alex, is there any other way to start? 
How can you do anything sensible  without knowing what's going 
on, without having the data?" Ralph is true to his profession; for 
him, knowing what's going on is  equivalent to having the data 
neatly stored in his computer files. 
Bob points to the white board and chuckles, "You call this 
mess knowing what's going on? Alex , come on. We all know that 
this nonsense of fact finding will continue until our committee 
runs out of ideas for gathering further facts." 
"Or they run out of time," Sta cey adds with a bitter smile. 
"Yes, of course," Bob accepts, and turning to everybody he 
finishes his questions, "What do you think that we, acting as a 
committee, would do next? We know a committee can't submit 
this mess."  
Captured by Plamen T.
290
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementThey all laugh nervously. I'm really pleased. They've finally 
started to realize the pr oblem that I'm facing. 
"What are they going to do no w?" Stacey muses. "They'll 
probably try to arrange this monstr ous pile of facts in some or- 
der." 
"Most likely," Lou agrees. "Sooner or later one of the com- 
mittee members will suggest organi zing the shapes according to 
their relative size." 
"I don't think so," Bob disagree s. "Determining the relative 
size of different shapes is quite difficult. They will probably de- 
cide to organize them according to the type of shapes." Lou 
doesn't seem to accept this, and so Bob explains, "They can ar- 
range the data by circles, rectangles, and stars." 
"What are they going to do with those four arbitrary 
shapes?" Ralph asks. 
"Probably they'll be put in a class of their own, the excep- 
tions." 
"Yes, of course," Ralph agrees. "The major reason for the 
constant reprogramming are those exceptions that keep popping 
up." 
"No, I have a better idea," Lo u says stubbornly. "They'll 
probably arrange them by color;  in this way there will be no 
ambiguity. Tell you what." He continues when he realizes that 
Bob is about to object, "Let's arr ange them first by color, within 
color by shape, and within each  subclass we'll arrange them by 
size. This way everybody will be happy." Count on Lou to find an 
acceptable compromise. 
"It's a marvelous idea," Ralph pi cks up the ball. "Now we can 
submit our findings in the form of tables and histograms. It will be 
a very impressive report, especially once I pump up the graphics 
package. Minimum two hund red pages, guaranteed." 
"Yes, an impressive, in-depth survey," I say sarcastically. We 
all sit silently, absorbing the bitter lesson we've just taught our- 
selves. 
"You know," I say after a while , "It's much worse than just 
wasting time producing useless, pompous reports. This overcon- 
cern about the 'proper way to arr ange things' manifests itself in 
other harmful ways." 
"What do you mean?" Lou asks me. 
"I mean the merry-go-round that we're all too familiar with; 
arranging the company according to product lines and then 
Captured by Plamen T.
291
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementchanging it according to functional capabilities—and vice versa. 
Deciding that the company is wa sting too much money on dupli- 
cated efforts and thus moving to a more centralized mode. Ten 
y e a r s  l a t e r ,  w e  w a n t  t o  e n c o u r a g e entrepreneurship and we move 
back to decentralization. Almost every big company is oscillating, 
every five to ten years from centralization to decentralization, and 
then back again." 
"Yeah," says Bob. "As a presid ent of a company, when you 
don't know what to do, when things are not going well, you can 
always shuffle the cards—reorganize." Mockingly he continues, 
"That will do it! This reorganiza tion will solve all our problems!" 
We stare at each other. If it weren't so painfully true, we 
might laugh. 
"Bob," I say at last. "This isn't funny. The only somewhat 
practical ideas I had in mind for what I should do as the new 
division manager were all based on reorganizing the division." 
"Oh, no," they all groan. 
"O.K. then," and I turn back to the white board, which is not 
so white any more. "What is one sup posed to do with this pile of 
colored shapes, except to arrange them in some order? Dealing 
directly with the pile is obviously totally impractical. Arranging 
the facts according to so me order, classification, must be the first 
step. Maybe we can proceed from there in a different way than 
writing reports or rearranging the company, but the first step 
definitely must be to put some order into the mess." 
As I continue to look at the board, a new question starts to 
bother me; "In how many ways can one arrange the assembled 
facts?" 
"Obviously, we can arrange them by color," Lou answers. 
"Or by size," Stacey adds. 
"Or by shape." Bob doesn't give up on his suggestion. 
"Any other possibilities?" I ask. 
"Yes, of course," Ralph says. "W e can divide the board by an 
imaginary grid and arrange the shapes according to their coordi- 
nates." When he sees our puzzled looks he clarifies, "It'll give us 
the ability to construct many different arrangements based on the 
shapes' relative position on the board." 
"What a great idea," Bob says sarcastically. "You know what, 
I'd rather use the dart technique—throw a dart and start arrang- 
ing the shapes according to the order in which we nail 'em. All 
Captured by Plamen T.
292
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementthese methods have just as much meaning. At least my last sug- 
gestion offers some satisfaction." 
"O.K. fellows," I say firmly. "Bob 's last suggestion has really 
clarified what we're dealing with here. We're dealing with the fact 
that we haven't got any idea of what we're doing. If we're just 
looking for some arbitrary orde r, and we can choose among so 
many possibilities, then what's the point in putting so much effort 
in collecting so much data? What do we gain from it, except the 
ability to impress people with some thick reports or to throw the 
company into another reorganization in order to hide from the 
fact that we don't really underst and what we're doing? This ave- 
nue of first collecting data, getting  familiar with the facts, seems 
to lead us nowhere. It's nothing more than an exercise in futility. 
Come on, we need another way to attack the issue. Any sugges- 
tions?" 
When nobody answers, I say, "E nough for today. We'll con- 
tinue tomorrow—same time, same place."  
Captured by Plamen T.
293
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement35 
"Well, anybody got anything good, any breakthroughs?" I 
try to start the meeting off as cheerfully as possible. It's not ex- 
actly how I feel; I spent the whole night tossing in my bed, 
searching for any opening, which I never did find. 
"I think that I have one," Stacey speaks up. "Not exactly a 
breakthrough, but . . ." 
"Wait," says Ralph. 
Ralph interrupting. That's new. 
In an apologetic tone he expl ains, "Before we go off on a 
different angle, I'd like to return to where we were yesterday. I 
think we were too hasty in our d ecision that classification of data 
can't lead to something good. May I?" 
"Sure," Stacey says, almost in relief. 
"Well," Ralph fidgets, apparently uncomfortable, "as you 
know, or maybe you don't, I minored in chemistry in college. I 
don't know much about it, but one  story stuck in my mind. Last 
night I looked back at my notes from class and I think you'll find 
it interesting as well. It's a story about a remarkable Russian 
named Mendeleev, and it happene d less than one hundred fifty 
years ago." 
Noticing that he grabbed our attention, he becomes more 
confident. Ralph is a family man and has three little children, so 
he's probably used to telling stories. 
"Right from the start, in the days of ancient Greece, people 
postulated that underlying the phenomenal variety of materials 
there must be a simple set of elements from which all other sub- 
stances are composed." 
As he gets into his story his voice becomes rich with under- 
tones. 
"The Greeks naively assumed that the elements were air, 
earth, water and . . ." 
"Fire," Bob completes the list. 
"Correct," says Ralph. 
What a wasted talent. He's a re al story teller, I think to my- 
self. Who would have suspected it? 
"Since then, as you know, people have proven that earth is 
Captured by Plamen T.
294
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementnot a basic element but actually  composed of many different 
more basic minerals. Air is composed of different types of gases, 
and even water is a composition of more basic elements, hydro- 
gen and oxygen. The kiss of death to the naive Greece approach 
came at the end of the eighteenth century, when Lavoisier 
showed that fire is not a substance but rather a process, the pro- 
cess of attachment to oxygen." 
"Over many years, out of the chemists' mammoth work, the 
more basic elements emerged and  by the middle of the nine- 
teenth century, sixty-three elements had been identified. The sit- 
uation actually resembled our colored board. Many circles, rec- 
tangles, stars, and other shapes, in many colors and sizes filled 
the area with no apparent order. A real mess." 
"Many tried to organize the elements but no one succeeded 
in offering anything that was not immediately dismissed as a fu- 
tile arbitrary exercise. It got to the point that most chemists gave 
up on the possibility of finding any generic order and concen- 
trated their efforts on finding more hard facts regarding the com- 
bination of the elements to create  other, more complicated mate- 
rials." 
"Makes sense," Bob remarks. "I like practical people." 
"Yes Bob," Ralph smiles at him,  "But there was one profes- 
sor who claimed that in his eyes it resembled dealing with the 
leaves while nobody had found yet the trunk." 
"Good point," says Lou. 
"So this peculiar Russian professor who, by the way, taught 
in Paris, decided to concentrate on revealing the underlying or- 
der governing the elements. Ho w would you go about it?" 
"Shape is out of the question, " Stacey says, looking at Bob. 
"Why? What do you have against shapes?" Bob demands. 
"Out of the question," she repeats. "Some of the elements 
are gases, some are liquids." 
"Yeah, you're right." Being Bob he continues, "But what 
about color? You like colors, don't you? Some gases have colors, 
like green chlorine, and we can say that the others have transpar- 
ent colors." 
"Nice try," Ralph says, ignoring their apparent attempt to 
ridicule his story. "Unfortunately some elements do not have a 
decisive color. Take pure carbon, for example. It appears as black 
graphite, or more rarely as a sparkling diamond." 
"I prefer diamonds," Stacey jokes.  
Captured by Plamen T.
295
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementWe all laugh, then responding to Ralph's gesture I give it a 
try. "We probably have to look for a more numerical measure. 
This way we'll be able to arrange the elements without being 
criticized for subjective preferences." 
"Very good," says Ralph. He's probably mistaken us for his 
kids. "What do you suggest as a suitable measure?" he asks me. 
"I didn't take chemistry," I re ply, "not even as a minor. How 
would I know?" But since I don't want to offend Ralph I con- 
tinue, "Maybe something like specific gravity, electrical conduc- 
tivity, or something more fancy li ke the number of calories ab- 
sorbed or released when the element is combining with a 
reference element like oxygen." 
"Not bad, not bad at all. Mendeleev took basically the same 
approach. He chose to use a quantitative measurement that was 
known for each element and which didn't change as a function of 
the temperature or the state of th e substance. It was the quantity 
known as atomic weight, which represents the ratio between the 
weight of one atom of the given element and the weight of one 
atom of the lightest element, hy drogen. This number provided 
Mendeleev with a unique numerical identifier for each element." 
"Big deal," Bob can't hold himself. "Exactly as I suspected, 
now he could organize all the elem ents according to their ascend- 
ing atomic weights, like soldiers in a  l i n e .  B u t  w h a t  g o o d  d o e s  i t  
do? What practical things can possibly come out of it? Like I said, 
children playing with lead soldiers, pretending that they do very 
important work." 
"Not so fast," Ralph responds. "If Mendeleev had stopped 
here, I would accept your criticism, but he took it a step further. 
He didn't arrange the elements in a line. He had noticed that 
each seventh soldier represents basically the same chemical be- 
havior, though with increased intensity. Thus he organized the 
elements in a table with seven columns. 
"In this way all the elements were displayed according to 
ascending atomic weight, and in each column you find elements 
with the same chemical behavior in ascending intensity. For ex- 
ample, in the first column of his table stood lithium, which is the 
lightest of all metals, and which,  when put into water, becomes 
warm. Right below it is sodium , which when put into water, 
flames. Then the next one in the same column is potassium, 
which reacts even more violently to water. The last one is cesium 
which flames even in regular air."  
Captured by Plamen T.
296
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Very nice, but as I suspected it 's nothing more than child's 
play. What are the practical implications?" Down-to-earth Bob. 
"There were practical ramifications," Ralph answers. "You 
see, when Mendeleev constructed his table, not all the elements 
were already found. This caused some holes in his table that he 
reacted to by 'inventing' the appropriate missing elements. His 
classification gave him the ability to predict their weight and 
other properties. You must agree that's a real achievement." 
"How was it accepted by the othe r scientists of his time?" I 
ask, curious. "Inventing new el ements must have been received 
with some skepticism." 
"Skepticism is an understatement. Mendeleev became the 
laughing stock of the entire commu nity. Especially when his table 
was not as neatly arranged as I described it to you. Hydrogen was 
floating there above the table, not actually in any column, and 
some rows didn't have one element in their seventh column, but 
a hodgepodge of several elements crowded into one spot." 
"So what happened at the end?" Stacey impatiently asks. 
"Did his predictions come true?" 
"Yes," says Ralph, "and with surprising accuracy. It took 
some years, but while he was still alive all the elements that 
Mendeleev predicted were found. The last of the elements that 
he 'invented' was found sixteen yea rs later. He had predicted it 
would be a dark gray metal. It wa s. He predicted that its atomic 
weight would be about 72; in reality it was 72.32. Its specific 
gravity he thought would be about 5.5, and it was 5.47." 
"I bet nobody laughed at him then." 
"Certainly not. The attitude sw itched to admiration and his 
periodic table is regarded by students of chemistry today as basic 
as the ten commandments." 
"I'm still not impressed," my  stubborn replacement says. 
I feel obliged to remark, "The biggest benefit was probably 
the fact that due to Mendeleev's table people didn't have to waste 
time looking for more elements."  And turning to Bob I say "You 
see, the classification helped in determining, once and for all, 
how many elements do exist. Putting any new element in the 
table would have upset the clear order." 
Ralph coughs in embarrassment, "Sorry Alex but that's not 
the case. Only ten years after the table was fully accepted, several 
new elements were discovered, the noble gases. It turned out that 
Captured by Plamen T.
297
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementthe table should have been cons tructed to have eight columns, 
not seven." 
"Just as I've said," Bob jumps in a triumphant voice. "Even 
when it works you still can't trust it." 
"Calm down, Bob. You must admit that Ralph's story has a 
lot of merit for us. I suggest t hat we ask ourselves what's the 
difference between Mendeleev's cla ssification of the chemical ele- 
ments and our many attempts to arrange the colored shapes in 
order? Why was his so powerful and ours so arbitrary?" 
"That's just it," says Ralph, "Ours were arbitrary, and his 
was . . ." 
"Was what? Not arbitrary?" Lou completes his sentence. 
"Forget it." Ralph agrees. "That's not a serious answer. I'm 
just playing with words." 
"What exactly do we mean by arbitrary, and not arbitrary?" I 
raise the question. 
Since nobody answers I continue, "Actually, what are we 
looking for? We're looking to arrange the facts in some order. 
What type of order are we seeking? An arbitrary order that we 
superimpose externally on the facts, or are we trying to reveal an 
intrinsic order, an order that already exists there?" 
"You're absolutely right," Ralph is getting excited, "Mende- 
leev definitely revealed an intrin sic order. He didn't reveal the 
reason for that order, that had to wait for another fifty years, 
when the internal structure of the atoms was found, but he defi- 
nitely revealed the intrinsic order. That's why his classification 
was so powerful. Any other classification that just tries to super- 
impose some order, any order, on the given facts is useful in only 
one sense—it gives the ability to present the facts in a sequence, 
tables, or graphs. In other words, helpful in preparing useless, 
thick reports. 
"You see," he continues enthusiastically, "we, in our attempts 
to arrange the colored shapes, didn 't reveal any intrinsic order. 
Simply because in that arbitrar y collection there was no intrinsic 
order to be revealed. That's why all our attempts were arbitrary, 
all futile to the same extent." 
"Yes, Ralph," Lou says in a cold  tone, "But that doesn't mean 
that in other cases, where intrinsi c order does exist, like in man- 
aging a division, we can't fool ou rselves in the same way. We can 
always procrastinate by wasting ou r time playing with some artifi- 
cial, external order. Let's face it, what do you think Alex and I 
Captured by Plamen T.
298
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementwould have done with the pile of facts that we suggested he 
gather. Judging by what we've done for so long here in the plant, 
probably just that—playing a lot of games with numbers and 
words. The question is what are we going to do differently now? 
Anybody got an answer?" 
Looking at Ralph sunk in his ch air I say, "If we could reveal 
the intrinsic order of the events in the division, that would cer- 
tainly be of tremendous help." 
"Yes," Lou says, "But how does one go about revealing the 
intrinsic order?" 
"How can one identify an intrinsic order even when he stum- 
bles on it?" Bob adds. 
After a while Lou says, "Probably in order to answer this 
question we should ask a more basic one: What provides the in- 
trinsic order among various facts? Looking at the elements that 
Mendeleev had to deal with, they all seemed different. Some were 
metals and some gases, some yellow and some black, no two were 
identical. Yes, there were some that exhibited similarities, but 
that's also the case for the arbitr ary shapes that Alex drew on the 
board." 
They continue to argue but I' m not listening any more. I'm 
stuck on Lou's question, "How does one go about revealing the 
intrinsic order?" He asked it as if it were a rhetorical question, as 
if the obvious answer is that it is impossible. But scientists do 
reveal the intrinsic order of things  . . . and Jonah is a scientist. 
"Suppose that it is possible," I break into the conversation, 
"suppose that a technique to reveal  the intrinsic order does exist? 
Wouldn't such a technique be a powerful management tool?" 
"Without a doubt," says Lou. "But what's the point in day- 
dreaming?" 
"And what happened to you today?" I ask Julie, after I've 
told her the day's events in detail. 
"I spent some time in the libra ry. Do you know that Socrates 
didn't write anything? Socrates' dialogues actually were written 
by his pupil, Plato. The librarian here is a very pleasant woman, I 
like her a lot. Anyhow, she recommended some of the dialogues 
and I've started to read them." 
I can't hold my surprise, "You read philosophy! What for, 
isn't it boring?" 
She  grins  at me,   "You  were   talking  about the  Socratic  
Captured by Plamen T.
299
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementmethod as a method to persuade other people. I wouldn't touch 
philosophy with a ten foot pole, but to learn a method to per- 
suade my stubborn husband and kids—for that I'm willing to 
sweat." 
"So you started to read philosophy," I'm  still trying to digest 
it. 
"You make it sound like a punishment," she laughs. "Alex, 
did you ever read the dialogues of Socrates?" 
"No." 
"They're not too bad. They're ac tually written like stories. 
They're quite interesting." 
"How many have you read so far?" I ask, 
"I'm still slaving on the first one, Protagoras."  
"It'll be interesting to hear your opinion tomorrow." I say 
skeptically. "If it's still positive, maybe I'll read it, too." 
"Yeah, when pigs fly," she says. Before I can answer, she 
stands up, "Let's hit the sack." 
I yawn and join her.                                                            ^ 
Captured by Plamen T.
300
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement36 
We're getting started a little late since Stacey and Bob have to 
deal with some problematic orders. I wonder what's really hap- 
pening; are we drifting back in to trouble? Is Stacey's warning 
about her Capacity Constraint Resour ces starting to materialize? 
She was concerned about any increase  in sales and, for sure, sales 
are slowly but constantly on the ri se. I dismiss these thoughts; it's 
just the natural friction that should be expected when your mate- 
rial manager moves her responsibilit ies to her replacement. I de- 
cided not to interfere; if it ev olves into something serious they 
won't hesitate to tell me. 
This is not going to be easy. We all are action-oriented and 
searching for basic procedures is almost against our nature, no 
matter how much Bob tells me th at he's been transformed. 
So when, at last, they all take seats I remind them about the 
issue on the table. If we want the same movement that we've 
succeeded in starting here to happ en in the entire division, we 
have to clarify for ourselves what we actually have done—in a 
generic sense. Repeating the specific actions won't work. Not only 
are the plants very different from each other; how can one fight 
local efficiencies in sales, or  cut batches in product design? 
Stacey is the only one who ha s something to offer and her 
idea is simple. If Jonah forced us to start by asking, 'what is the 
goal of the company', Stacey suggests that we start by asking, 
'what is our goal'—not as individuals, but as managers. 
We don't like it. It's too theore tical. Bob yawns, looks bored. 
Lou responds to my unspoken requ est and volunteers to play the 
game. 
With a smile he says, "This is tr ivial. If the goal of our com- 
pany is 'to make more money now as well as in the future,' then 
our job is to try and move our division to achieve that goal." 
"Can you do it?" Stacey asks. "I f the goal includes the word 
'more', can we achieve the goal?" 
"I see what you mean," Lou responds, still smiling. "No, of 
course we can't achieve a goal that is open-ended. What we'll 
have to do is to try and move the division toward that goal. And 
you are right, Stacey, it's not a one-shot effort, we have to con- 
Captured by Plamen T.
301
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementstantly strive toward it. Let me rephrase my initial answer." And 
in his punctuating voice, emphas izing each word, he concludes, 
"A good job will be to start our division on a process of on-going 
improvement." 
Turning to me, Stacey says, "You asked for an idea of how to 
tackle the subject? I think that we should proceed from here." 
"How?" Donovan echoes the question that everybody is 
thinking. 
"I don't know," is Stacey's answer. When she sees Bob's ex- 
pression she says defensively, "I didn't claim to have a break- 
through, just an idea." 
"Thank you Stacey," I say, and turning to the rest I point to 
the white board that nobody has bothered to erase yet. "We must 
admit that it is a different angle from the one we had so far." 
We are stuck. Donovan's question is certainly in place. So I 
try to gain some momentum by cleaning the board and writing in 
big letters "A process of on-going improvement." 
It doesn't help much. We sit in silence for a while staring at 
the board. 
"Comments?" I ask at last. And, as expected, it's Bob who 
voices everybody's feeling. 
"I'm sick and tired of these big words. Everywhere I go, I 
hear the same thing." He stands up, goes to the board, and mim- 
icking a first grade teacher he intones "A process ... of ... 
on-going . . . improvement." 
Sitting back down he adds, "Even if I wanted to forget it I 
can't. Hilton Smyth's memos are a ll spotted with this phrase. By 
the way Alex, these memos keep on coming, and more often than 
before. In the name of savings, at least saving paper, can't you do 
something to stop it?" 
"In due time. But let's keep at  it. If nothing comes out of 
these discussions, then the only useful  thing that I will be able to 
do as the division manager will be to stop some memos. Come on 
Bob, spit out your frustrations." 
It doesn't take much to encour age Bob to voice his true opin- 
ion. "Every plant in our company, has already launched at least 
four or five of those pain-in- the-neck improvement projects. If 
you ask me, they lead only to indigestion problems. You go down 
there, to the floor, and mention a new improvement project and 
you'll see the response. People have already developed allergies 
to the phrase."  
Captured by Plamen T.
302
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"So, what are you suggesting should be done?" I pour some 
more fuel on his flames. 
"To do what we have done here," he roars back. "We, here, 
have not done any of these. We have not launched even one 
formal improvement project. But l ook at what we have achieved. 
No talks, no big words, but if you ask me, what we've achieved 
here is the real thing." 
"You're right," I try to calm the volcano that I have awak- 
e n e d .  " B u t  B o b ,  i f  w e  w a n t  t o  d o  the same in the entire division 
we must pinpoint what exactly th e difference is between what we 
have done and what everyone  else has tried to do." 
"We haven't launched so many improvement projects," he 
says. 
"That is not accurate," Stacey responds. "We have taken 
many initiatives: in shop floor procedures, in measurements, in 
quality, in local processes, not to mention the changes that we 
have made in the way we release material to production." Raising 
her hand to stop Bob from interrupting, she concludes: "True, 
we didn't call them improvement projects, but I don't believe the 
crucial difference is that we didn't bother to title them." 
"So why do you think we hav e succeeded where so many 
have failed?" I ask her. 
"Simple," Bob jumps in. "They talked, we did." 
"Who is playing with words now," I shut him off. 
"I think that the key," Stacey says  in a thoughtful tone, "is in 
the different way we interpre ted the word 'improvement'." 
"What do you mean?" I ask her. 
"She is absolutely right!" Lou beams. "It's all a matter of 
measurements." 
"For an accountant," Bob speaks  to the room, "Everything is 
a matter of measurements." 
Lou stands up and starts to pace the room. I rarely see him 
so excited. 
We wait. 
At last he turns to the board and writes: 
THROUGHPUT    INVENTOR Y    OPERATING EXPENSE 
Then he turns back to us and says, "Everywhere, improve- 
ment was interpreted as almost sy nonymous to cost savings. Peo- 
Captured by Plamen T.
303
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementpie are concentrating on reducing operating expenses as if it's 
the most important measurement." 
"Not even that," Bob interrupts. "We were busy reducing 
costs that didn't have any impact on reducing operating ex- 
penses." 
"Correct," Lou continues. "But the important thing is that 
we, in our plant, have switched to regard throughput as the most 
important measurement. Improvemen t  f o r  u s  i s  n o t  s o  m u c h  t o  
reduce costs but to increase throughput." 
"You are right," Stacey agrees. "The entire bottleneck con- 
cept is not geared to decrease operating expense, it's focused on 
increasing throughput." 
"What you are telling us," I say slowly, trying to digest it, "is 
that we have switched the scale of importance." 
"That's precisely what it is," Lou says. "In the past, cost was 
the most important, throughput was second, and inventory was a 
remote third." Smiling at me he adds, "To the extent that we 
regarded it as assets. Our new scale is different. Throughput is 
most important, then inventory—due to its impact on 
throughput and only then, at the tail, comes operating expenses. 
And our numbers certainly confirm it," Lou provides the evi- 
dence. "Throughput and inventory had changed by several tens 
of percent while operating expens es went down by less than two 
percent." 
"This is a very important lesson," I say. "What you claim is 
that we have moved from the 'cos t world' into the 'throughput 
world'." 
After a minute of silence I cont inue, "You know what, it re- 
ally highlights another problem. Changing the measurements' 
scale of importance, moving from one world into another, is with- 
out a doubt a culture change. Let's face it, that is exactly what we 
had to go through, a culture ch ange. But how are we going to 
take the division through such a change?" 
I go to pour myself another cup of coffee. Bob joins me. 
"You know, Alex, something is still missing. I have the feeling 
that the entire approach we took was different." 
"In what way?" I ask. 
"I don't know. But one thing I can tell you, we haven't de- 
clared any improvement project, th ey grow from the need. Some- 
how it was always obvious what the next step should be." 
"I guess so."  
Captured by Plamen T.
304
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementWe spend good time. We bring up the actions we took and 
verify that each one actually has been guided by our new scale. 
Bob is very quiet until he jumps to his feet. 
"I nailed the bastard!" he shouts, "I have it!" 
He goes to the board, grabs a marker and put a heavy circle 
around the word 'improvement.' "Process of on-going improve- 
ment," he booms. "Lou and his fixation on measurements forced 
us to concentrate on the last word. Don't you realize that the real 
sneaky SOB is the first one?" and he draws several circles around 
the word 'process.' 
"If Lou has a fixation about measurements," I say somewhat 
irritated, "then you certainly have a fixation about processes. 
Let's hope your fixation will turn up to be as useful as his." 
"Sure thing, boss. I knew that  the way we handled it was 
different. That it wasn't just a matter of scales." 
He returned to his seat still beaming. 
"Do you care to elaborate?" Stacey inquires in a soft voice. 
"You haven't got it?" Bob is surprised. 
"Neither did we." We all looked perplexed. 
He looks around and when he realizes that we are serious he 
asks, "What is a process? We all kn ow. It's a sequence of steps to 
be followed. Correct?" 
"Yes . . ." 
"So, will anybody tell me what the process is that we should 
follow? What is the process ment ioned in our 'process of on-go- 
ing improvement'? Do you think th at launching several improve- 
ment projects is a process? We haven't done that, we have fol- 
lowed a process. That's what we have done." 
"He's right," says Ralph in his quiet voice. 
I stand up and shake Bob's ha nd. Everybody is smiling at 
him. 
Then Lou asks, "What pr ocess have we followed?" 
Bob doesn't hurry to answer. At last he says, "I don't know, 
but we definitely followed a process." 
To save embarrassment I hurriedly say, "Let's find it. If we 
followed it, it shouldn't be too difficu lt to find. Let's think, what is 
the first thing we did?" 
Before anybody has a chance to  answer Ralph says, "You 
know, these two things are connected." 
"What things?"  
Captured by Plamen T.
305
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"In the 'cost world' as Alex called it, we are concerned pri- 
marily with cost. Cost is draine d everywhere, everything cost us 
money. We had viewed our comple x organization as if it were 
composed out of many links and each link is important to con- 
trol." 
"Will you please get to the point?" Bob asks impatiently. 
"Let him talk," Stacey is no less impatient. 
Ralph ignores them both and calmly continues, "It's like 
measuring a chain according to its weight. Every link is impor- 
tant. Of course, if the links are very different from each other 
then we use the principle of the twenty-eighty rule. Twenty per- 
cent of the variables are responsible for eighty percent of the 
result. The mere fact that we all know the Pareto principle shows 
us to what extent Lou is right, th e extent to which we all were in 
the cost world." 
Stacey puts her hand on Bob's to  prevent him from interfer- 
ing. ^ 
"We recognize that the scale has to be changed," Ralph con- 
tinues. "We choose throughput as the most important measure- 
ment. Where do we achieve throug hput? At each link? No. Only 
at the end of all operations. You see, Bob, deciding that 
throughput is number one is like changing from considering 
weight to considering strength." 
"I don't see a thing," is Bob's response. 
Ralph doesn't let go, "What determines the strength of a 
chain?" he asks Bob. 
"The weakest link, wise guy." 
"So if you want to improve the strength of the chain, what 
must your first step be?" 
"To find the weakest link. To identify the bottleneck!" Bob 
pats him on the back. "That's it! What a guy!" And he pats him 
again. 
Ralph looks a little bent, but he is glowing. As a matter of 
fact, we all are. 
After that it was easy. Relatively  easy. It wasn't too long be- 
fore the process was written clearly on the board: 
Captured by Plamen T.
306
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementSTEP 1. Identify the system's bottlenecks. 
(After all it wasn't too difficu lt to identify the oven and 
the NCX10 as the bottlenecks of the plant.) 
STEP 2. Decide how to exploit the bottlenecks. 
(That was fun. Realizing that those machines should not 
take a lunch break, etc.) 
STEP 3. Subordinate everything  else to the above decision. 
(Making sure that everything marches to the tune of the 
constraints. The red and green tags.) 
STEP 4. Elevate the system's bottlenecks. 
(Bringing back the old Zmegma, switching back to old, 
less "effective" routings. . . .) 
STEP 5. If, in a previous step, a bottleneck has been broken go 
back to step 1. 
I look at the board. It's so simple. Plain common sense. I'm 
wondering, and not for the first time, how come we didn't see it 
before, when Stacey speaks up. 
"Bob is right, we certainly fo llowed this process, and we cy- 
cled through it more than once— even the nature of the bottle- 
necks we had to deal with changed." 
"What do you mean by the 'nature of the bottlenecks?' " I 
ask. 
"I mean a major change," she says. "You know, something 
serious like the bottleneck chang ing from being a machine to 
being something totally different, like insufficient market de- 
mand. Each time that we've gone through this five-step cycle the 
nature of the bottleneck has changed. First the bottlenecks were 
the oven and the NCX10, then it was the material release system 
—remember the last time when Jo nah was here?—then it was the 
market, and I'm afraid that very so on it'll be back in production." 
"You're right," I say. And then , "It's a little odd to call the 
market or the system of material release a bottleneck. Why don't 
we change the word, to . . ." 
"Constraint?" Stacey suggests. 
We correct it on the board. Then we just sit there admiring 
our work. 
"What am I going to do to continue the momentum?" I ask 
Julie. 
"Never satisfied, huh?"  and then  she adds passionately, 
Captured by Plamen T.
307
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Alex, why do you drive yourself so hard? Aren't the five steps 
that you developed enough of an achievement for one day?" 
"Of course it's enough. It's more than enough. Finding the 
process that everybody is looking for, the way to proceed system- 
atically on the line of on-going improvement, is quite an achieve- 
ment. But Julie, I'm talking about something else. How can we 
continue to improve the plant rapidly?" 
"What's the problem? It seems that everything is sailing for- 
ward quite smoothly." 
I sigh, "Not exactly, Julie. I can't push aggressively for more 
orders because we're afraid that any additional sales will create 
more bottlenecks and throw us back into the nightmare of expe- 
diting. On the other hand, I can't ask for a major expansion in 
hiring or machines; the existing bottom line results don't justify it 
yet." 
"My impatient husband," she laughs. "It looks like you sim- 
ply have to sit tight and wait until the plant generates enough 
money to justify more investment s. In any event darling, very 
shortly it will be Donovan's headac he. It's about time you allowed 
others to worry." 
"Maybe you're right," I say, not totally convinced.  
Captured by Plamen T.
308
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement37 
"Something is wrong," Ralph says after we've made our- 
selves comfortable. "Som ething is still missing." 
"What?" Bob says aggressively, all geared up to protect our 
new creation. 
"If step 3 is right . . ." Ralph is speaking very slowly, "if we 
have to subordinate everything to the decision that we made on 
the constraint, then . . ." 
"Come on Ralph," Bob says. "What's all this 'if we have to 
subordinate'? Is there any doubt that we must subordinate the 
non-constraints to the constraints? What are the schedules that 
you generate on your computers if not the act of subordinating 
everything to our decision a bout the bottlenecks' work?" 
"I don't doubt that," Ralph says apologetically. "But when 
the nature of the constraint has changed, one would expect to see 
a major change in the way we operate all non-constraints." 
"That makes sense," Stacey says encouragingly. "So what is 
bothering you?" 
"I don't recall that we did such changes." 
"He's right," Bob says in a low voice. "I don't recall it ei- 
ther." 
"We didn't," I confirm after a while. 
"Maybe we should have?" Bob says in a thoughtful voice. 
"Let's examine it," I say. And then, "When was the first time 
the constraint changed?" 
"It happened when some green-tag parts started arriving at 
assembly too late," Stacey says without hesitation. "Remember 
our fear that new bottlenecks were popping up?" 
"Yes," I say. "And then Jonah ca me and showed us it wasn't 
new bottlenecks, but that the constraint had shifted to being the 
way we released work to the plant." 
"I still remember the shock," Bob comments, "of restricting 
the release of material, even though the people had practically 
nothing else to work on." 
"And our fear that 'efficiencies' would drop," Lou com- 
ments. "In retrospect, I'm amazed that we had the courage to do 
it." 
Captured by Plamen T.
309
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"We did it because it made perfect sense," I say. "Reality 
certainly proved us right. So Ralph,  in that case at least, we did 
affect all the non-constraints. Should we move on?" 
Ralph doesn't answer. 
"Something's still troubling you?" I inquire. 
"Yes," he says, "but I can't put my finger on it." 
I wait for him. 
Finally Stacey says, "What's th e problem, Ralph? You, Bob, 
and I generated the work list for the constraints. Then you had 
the computer generate release dates for all material, based on 
that list. We definitely changed the way we operated a non-con- 
straint, that is, if we consider the computer as a non-constraint." 
Ralph laughs nervously. 
"Then," Stacey continues, "I  made my people obey those 
computer lists. That was a major change in the way they operate 
—especially when you consider how much pressure the foremen 
put on them to supply them with work." 
"But you must admit the biggest change was on the shop 
floor," Bob contributes. "It was very difficult for most people to 
swallow that we really meant they shouldn't work all the time. 
Don't forget that the fear of layoffs was hanging heavily above 
us." 
"I guess it's all right," Ralph gives up. 
"What did we do with the method we were using?" Lou asks. 
"You know, the green and red tags." 
"Nothing," Stacey replies. "Why should we do anything 
about it?" 
"Thank you, Lou," Ralph says . "That is exactly what was 
bothering me." Turning to Stacey he adds, "Do you remember 
the reason for using those tags in the first place? We wanted to 
establish clear priorities. We wanted  each worker to know what is 
important and must be worked on immediately, and what is less 
important." 
"That's right," she says. "That' s exactly why we did it. Oh, I 
see what you mean. Now—not like in  the past when we released 
stuff just to provide work—now w hatever we release to the floor 
is basically of the same importan ce. Let me think for a minute." 
We all do. 
"Oh shit," she moans. 
"What's the matter?" Bob asks.  
Captured by Plamen T.
310
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"I just realized the impact that those darn tags have on our 
operation." 
"Well?" Bob presses her. 
"I'm embarrassed," she says. "I've been complaining about 
our problems with the six or seve n capacity constraint resources, 
I  r a i s e d  a l l  t h e  r e d  f l a g s ,  I ' v e  g o n e  a s  f a r  a s  t o  d e m a n d  t h a t  i n -  
coming orders be restricted. And now I see that I've created the 
problem with my own hands." 
"Fill us in, Stacey," I request. "You're way ahead of us." 
"Of course. You see, when do the green and red tags have an 
impact? Only when a work cente r has a queue, when the worker 
has to choose between two different jobs that are waiting; then he 
always works on the red tag first." 
"So?" 
"The largest queues," Stacey goes on, "are in front of the 
bottlenecks, but there the tags are irrelevant. The other place 
where we have relatively high queues is in front of the capacity 
constraint resources. These reso urces supply some parts to the 
bottlenecks, red-tag parts, but they work on many more green- 
tag parts, parts that go to asse mbly not through the bottlenecks. 
Today they do the red-tag parts first. This naturally delays the 
arrival of the green parts to assembly . We catch it when it is pretty 
late, when holes are already evident in the assembly buffer. Then, 
and only then, we go and change the priorities at those work 
centers. Basically, we restore the importance of the green parts." 
"So what you're telling us," B ob cannot contai n his surprise, 
"is that if you just eliminate the tags, it will be much better?" 
"Yes, that's what I'm saying. If  we eliminate the tags and we 
instruct the workers to work a ccording to the sequence in which 
the parts arrive—first come, first done—the parts will be done in 
the right sequence, fewer holes will be created in the buffers, my 
people will not have to track where the material is stuck, 
and . . ." 
"And the foreman will not have to constantly reshuffle pri- 
orities." Bob completes her sentence. 
I try to confirm what I heard.  "Stacey, are you positive that 
your warning about those constraint resources was just a false 
alarm? Can we safely take more orders?" 
"I think so," she says. "It explains one of my biggest myster- 
ies, why there are so few holes in the bottlenecks' buffers, while 
there are more and more in th e assembly buffer. By the way 
Captured by Plamen T.
311
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementfellows, the fact that there are mo re and more holes indicates that 
eventually we will run into the problem of insufficient capacity, 
but not right now. I'll take care of those tags immediately. You 
won't see them tomorrow." 
"Well, this discussion was very beneficial," I conclude. "Let's 
carry on. When was the second constraint broken?" 
"When we started shipping everything much ahead of time," 
Bob answers. "Shipping three weeks earlier is a clear indication 
that the constraint is no longer in production but in the market. 
Lack of sufficient orders limited the plant from making more 
money." 
"Correct," Lou confirms. "What do you think: did we do 
anything different on the non-constraints?" 
"Not me," says Bob. 
"Me neither," echoes Ralph. "Hey, wait a minute. How come 
we continue to release material according to the oven and the 
NCX10 if they are no longer the constraints?" 
We look at each other. Really, how come? 
"Something even funnier is going on. How come my com- 
puter shows that these two work centers are still a constraint, that 
they are constantly loaded to one hundred percent?" 
I turn my eyes to Stacey, "Do you know what's going on?" 
"I'm afraid I do," she admits. "It's definitely not my day." 
"And all this time I wondered why our finished goods were 
not depleting at a faster rate," I say. 
"Will one of you tell us what's  going on?" Bob says impa- 
tiently. 
"Go ahead, Stacey." 
"Come on fellas, don't look at me like that. After operating 
for so long with mountains of fi nished goods, wouldn't anybody 
do the same?" 
"Do what?" Bob is lost. "Will you please stop talking in rid- 
dles?" 
"We all knew how important it was to make the bottlenecks 
work all the time." Stacey starts at last to explain. "Remember, 
'An hour lost on the bottleneck is an hour lost for the entire 
plant.' So, when I realized that  the load on the bottlenecks was 
dropping, I issued orders for products  to be on the shelf, in stock. 
Stupid, I know now, but at least at the moment our finished 
goods are balanced to roughly six weeks. No more of that awful 
Captured by Plamen T.
312
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementsituation where we hold mountains of some products and not 
even one single unit of others." 
"That's good," Lou says. "It means we can easily deplete it. 
Alex be careful not to do it too fast, remember the bottom-line 
ramifications." 
It's Stacey's turn to be puzzled . "Why shouldn't we get rid of 
the finished products as fast as possible?" she asks. 
"Never mind," I impatiently sa y. "Lou can, and should, ex- 
plain it to all of you later. Right now we should correct our five- 
step process. Now we all know to what extent Ralph was right, 
something is definitely missing." 
"Can I correct it?" Stacey says  sheepishly, and goes to the 
board. 
When she returns to her seat the board has the following: 
1.  IDENTIFY the system's constraint(s). 
2.  Decide how to EXPLOIT the system's constraint(s). 
3.  SUBORDINATE everything else to the above decision. 
4.  ELEVATE the system's constraint(s). 
5.  WARNING!!!! If in the previo us steps a constraint has been 
broken, go back to step 1, but do not allow INERTIA to cause 
a system's constraint. 
Examining the board, Lou moans, "It's much worse than I 
thought." 
"On the contrary," I'm surprise d. "It's much better than I 
thought." 
We look at each other. "You fi rst," I say. "Why do you claim 
that it's much worse?" 
"Because I've lost my only guideline." 
When he realizes that we don't get it, he elaborates; "All the 
changes that we made so far, all the sacred cows that we had to 
slaughter, had one thing in common, they all stem from cost 
accounting. Local efficiencies, opt imum batch sizes, product cost, 
inventory evaluations, all came from the same source. I didn't 
have much problem with it. As a controller I questioned cost 
accounting validity for a long time. Remember, it's the invention 
of the beginning of the century wh en conditions were much dif- 
ferent from today. As a matter of fact, I started to have a very 
good guideline; if it comes from cost accounting it must be 
wrong." 
Captured by Plamen T.
313
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Very good guideline," I smile. "But what is your problem?" 
"Don't you see, the problem is much bigger; it's not only cost 
accounting. We put on the green and red tags not because of cost 
accounting, but because we realiz ed the importance of the bottle- 
necks. Stacey created orders for finished goods because of our 
new understanding, because she wanted to make sure that the 
bottlenecks' capacity will not be wasted. I thought that it takes a 
lot of time to develop inertia. What I now see is that it takes less 
than one month." 
"Yes, you are right," I say gloomily. "Whenever the con- 
straint is broken it changes conditions to the extent that it is very 
dangerous to extrapolate from the past." 
"As a matter of fact," Stacey adds, "even the things that we 
put in place in order to elevate the constraint must be reexam- 
ined." 
"How can we do it?" Bob asks. "It's impossible to question 
everything every time." 
"Something is still missi ng," Ralph summarizes. 
Something definitely is still missing. 
"Alex, it's your turn to explain," Lou says. 
"Explain what?" 
"Why did you claim that it's much better?" 
I smile. It's about time  for some good news. 
"Fellows, what stopped us from once again taking another 
jump on the bottom line? Nothing,  except for the conviction that 
we don't have enough capacity. Well, now we know differently. 
Now we know that we have a lot of spare capacity." 
How much spare capacity do we actually have? 
"Stacey, how much of the current  load on the oven and the 
NCX10 is due to the fictitious orders?" 
"Roughly twenty percent," she says quietly. 
"Marvelous," I rub my hands together. "We have enough 
capacity to really take the mark et. I'd better drive to headquar- 
ters tomorrow morning and have a heart-to-heart talk with 
Johnny Jons. Lou, I'll definitely need you. On second thought, 
Ralph, will you join us? And bring your computer with you, we're 
going to show them something."  
Captured by Plamen T.
314
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement38 
It is six o'clock in the morning when I pick up Lou and 
Ralph at the plant. We (I) decided that it will be best, since pick- 
ing them up at their houses wo uld mean I would have had to 
leave home close to five. In any event, we're probably not going 
to spend more than a few hours at  headquarters so it's reasonable 
to assume that we'll be back  to work in the afternoon. 
We hardly talk. Ralph, in the back seat, is busy with his lap- 
top computer. Lou probably thinks that he's still in bed. I drive 
on automatic pilot. That is, my mind is busy constructing imagi- 
nary conversations with Johnny Jons. I somehow have to con- 
vince him to get many more orders for our plant. 
Yesterday, in the heat of discovering the amount of free ca- 
pacity that we have, I looked only on the bright side. Now I 
wonder if I'm not just asking for miracles. 
I recheck the numbers in my head. In order to fill our capac- 
ity Johnny will have to come up with over ten million dollars of 
additional sales. It is totally unrealistic that he holds so much up 
his sleeve. 
So, squeezing, begging, and pleading techniques will not 
help. We'll have to come up with some innovative ideas. Well, the 
truth is that so far I haven't been able to come up with any. Let's 
hope Johnny has some clever ideas; he's the one who is supposed 
to be the expert in sales. 
"I want you to meet Dick Pashk y , "  J o h n n y  J o n s  s a y s  a s  w e  
enter the small conference room. "He's one of my best people. 
Dedicated, professional, and above all he's full of innovative ap- 
proaches. I thought it would be a good idea for you to get to 
know him. Do you mind if he joins us?" 
"On the contrary," I smile. "We need some innovative ideas. 
You see, what I want is for you to get my plant additional business 
—ten million dollars' worth." 
Johnny bursts out laughing. "Joker s, all of you in production 
are wonderful jokers. Dick, what di d I tell you? It's not easy to 
deal with plant managers. One is asking me to persuade his client 
to pay a ten percent increase in pr ice, another wants me to get rid 
Captured by Plamen T.
315
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementof a pile of old junk for full pri ce, but Alex, you're the best—ten 
million dollars!" 
He continues to laugh, but I don't join in. 
"Johnny, put on your thinking ca p. You must find more or- 
ders for my plant, ten million dollars more." 
He stops laughing and looks at me, "You are serious. Alex, 
what's happened to you? You know how tough it is to get more 
business these days; it's dog eat dog out there. Everybody is cut- 
ting each other's throats for the smallest order and you're talking 
about ten million dollars more?" 
I don't hurry to respond. I lean back in my seat and look at 
him. Finally I say, "Listen Johnny , you know that my plant has 
improved. What you don't know is to what extent it's improved. 
We're now capable of delivering everything within two weeks. 
We've demonstrated that we never miss an order, not even by 
one day. Our quality has improved to the extent that I'm sure 
we're the best in the market. We are very responsive, very quick, 
and above all, very reliable. This is not a sales pitch, it's the 
truth." 
"Alex, I know all this. I hear it from the best source, from my 
clients. But that doesn't mean that  I can immediately turn it into 
cash. Sales take time, credibility is not built overnight, it's a grad- 
ual process. And by the way, you shouldn't complain; I'm bring- 
ing you more and more sales. Be patient and don't press for 
miracles." 
"I have twenty percent spare capacity." I say, letting this 
sentence hang in the air. 
From the lack of response I understand that Johnny doesn't 
see the relevance. 
"I need twenty percent more sales," I translate for him. 
"Alex, orders are not apples ha nging from trees. I can't just 
go out and pick some for you." 
"There must be orders that you decline, because the quality 
requirement is too high or because the client is asking for unrea- 
sonably short delivery times or so mething. Get me those orders." 
"You probably don't know how bad the economy is," he 
sighs. "Today I accept any order, anything that moves. I know 
that a lot of dancing will be required later, but the current pres- 
sure is simply too high." 
"If the competition is so fierce and the economy is so bad," 
Captured by Plamen T.
316
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementLou says in his quiet voice, "then it  must be that clients are press- 
ing for lower prices." 
"Pressing is not the word. Squeezing is much more appropri- 
ate. Can you imagine, and this is just between us, in some cases 
I'm forced to accept business fo r practically zero margin." 
I start to see the light at the end of the tunnel. 
"Johnny, do they sometimes demand prices that are lower 
than our cost?" 
"Sometimes? All the time." 
"And what do you do?" I continue. 
"What can I do?" he laughs. "I try to explain th e best I can. 
Sometimes it even works." 
I swallow hard and say, "I'm ready to accept orders for ten 
percent below cost." 
Johnny doesn't hurry to answer. His peoples' bonuses are 
based on total sales dollars. Finally he says, "Forget it." 
"Why?" 
He doesn't answer. I persist, "Why should I forget it?" 
"Because it's stupid, because it doesn't make any business 
sense," he says in a hard voice,  and then softer, "Alex, I don't 
know what tricks you have in mind  but let me tell you, all those 
tricks have a very short life span be fore they explode in your face. 
Why do you want to ruin a promising career? You've done an 
outstanding job, why go and mess  it up? Besides, if we lower 
prices for one client, it's just a matter of time until the others find 
out and demand the same. What then?" 
He has a point. The last argument shows that the light at the 
end of the tunnel was just a train. 
Help comes from an unexpected side. 
"Djangler is not connected to our regular customers," Dick 
says hesitantly. "Besides, with the quantities he's asking for, we 
can always claim we gave him a volume discount." 
"Forget it," Johnny is practically shouting. "That bastard is 
asking us to give him the goods for basically nothing, not to men- 
tion that he wants us to ship  to France at our expense." 
Turning to me he says, "This French guy has chutzpah, it's 
unbelievable. We negotiated for three months. We established 
each other's credibility, we agreed  on terms and conditions. It all 
takes time. He asked for every technical detail that you can imag- 
ine, and we're not talking about one or two products, it's for 
almost the entire range. All this time not even a peep about 
Captured by Plamen T.
317
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementprices. At the end, just two days ago, when everything is agreed, 
he faxes me that our prices are not acceptable and sends his 
counter offer. I was expecting the usual thing, asking for price 
reductions of ten percent, mayb e fifteen percent considering the 
large quantities that he is willing to buy, but no, these Europeans 
probably have a different perception. For example, Model 
Twelve, the one that you pulled su ch a miracle on. Our price is 
nine hundred and ninety-two dollars. We sell it to Burnside for 
eight hundred and twenty-seven dollars; they're a big client and 
they consume very large quantities of this particular product. The 
bastard had the nerve to offer seven hundred and one dollars. 
Did you hear that! Seven hundred and one dollars. Now you 
understand?" 
I turn to Ralph, "What's our material cost for Model 
Twelve?" 
"Three hundred thirty-four dollars and seven cents," Lou 
answers without any hesitation. 
"Johnny, are you sure that accep ting this order will not have 
any impact on our domestic clients?" 
"Not unless we go out, and sing it from the rooftops. On this 
point Dick is right, no impact. But the whole idea is ridiculous. 
Why are we wasting our time?" 
I look at Lou, he nods. 
"We'll take it," I say. 
When Johnny doesn't respond, I repeat, "We'll take it." 
"Can you explain what is going on?" he finally says, between 
gritted teeth. 
"It's very simple," I answer. "I told you that I have spare 
capacity. If we take this order, the only out-of-pocket cost to pro- 
duce these products will be the cost of the materials. We'll get 
seven hundred and one dollars, and we'll pay three hundred and 
thirty-four dollars. That's three hundred seventy-eight dollars to 
the bottom line per unit." 
"It's three hundred sixty-six ninety-three per unit, and you 
forgot the freight," Lou corrects me. 
"Thank you. How much is the air freight per unit?" I ask 
Johnny. 
"I don't remember, but it's no t more than thirty bucks." 
"Can we see the details of that  deal?" I ask him. "What I'm 
particularly interested in is the products, the quantities per 
month, and the prices."  
Captured by Plamen T.
318
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementJohnny gives me a long look and then turns to Dick, "Bring 
it." " 
Once Dick is on his way, Johnny says in a puzzled voice, "I 
don't get it. You want to sell in Europe for a price that is much 
less than what we get here, even  less than the production cost, 
and you still claim that you'll make a lot of money? Lou, you're a 
controller, does it make sense to you?" 
"Yes," Lou says. 
Seeing the miserable expression on Johnny's face, I jump in 
before Lou has a chance to explain. Financial calculations, show- 
ing the fallacy of the 'product cost' concept won't help, it will just 
confuse Johnny even more than he's confused now. I decide to 
approach it from another angle. 
"Johnny, where do you prefer to buy a Japanese camera, in 
Tokyo or in Manhattan?" 
"In Manhattan, of course." 
"Why?" 
"Because in Manhattan it's cheaper, everybody knows that," 
Johnny says confidently, here he's on solid ground. "I know a 
place on Forty-seventh Street wh ere you can get a real bargain— 
half price compared to what th ey asked me to pay in Tokyo." 
"Why do you think it is cheaper in Manhattan?" I ask, and 
then answer my own question, "Ah, we know, transportation 
prices must be negative." 
We all laugh. 
"O.K. Alex. You've convinced me. I still don't understand 
but if it's good for the Japanese, it must be profitable." 
We work on the numbers for almost three hours. It's a good 
thing that I brought both Ralph and Lou. 
We calculate the load that this large deal will place on the 
bottlenecks—no problem. We chec k the impact on each of the 
seven problematic work centers—two might reach the dangerous 
zone, but we can manage. Then we  calculate the financial impact 
—impressive. Very impressive. At last we're ready. 
"Johnny, I have one more question. What guarantees that 
the European manufacturers won't start a price war?" 
"What do you care," Johnny brushes the issue aside. "With 
such ridiculous prices I'm going to lock in Monsieur Djangler for 
at least one year." 
"Not good enough," I say.  
Captured by Plamen T.
319
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Now you're really getting difficult. I knew that this was too 
good to be true." 
"That's not the point, Johnny. I want to use this deal as a 
beachhead to penetrate Europe. We can't afford a price war. We 
must come up with something else  besides price, something that 
will make it very difficult to compete with us. Tell me, what's the 
average supply time in Europe?" 
"About the same as here, eight to twelve weeks," he answers. 
"Good. Promise your Monsieur that if he commits to the 
quantities per year, we'll deliver any reasonable quantity within 
three weeks of receiving his fax." 
In astonishment he asks, "Are you serious?" 
"Dead serious. And by the way, I can start to deliver immedi- 
ately. I have whatever's needed fo r the first shipment in stock." 
"I guess it's your neck," he sighs. "What the heck, in any 
event you will have full responsibility very shortly. If I don't hear 
from you, I'll fax him tomorrow.  Consider it a done deal." 
Only after we pull out of the parking lot do we let ourselves 
go; it takes us more than fifteen minutes to settle down. That is, 
Lou and Ralph dive into polishing the numbers. From time to 
time they come up with a slight correction, usually not more than 
a few hundred dollars. Compared to the total deal it's not signifi- 
cant at all. But Lou finds it relaxing. 
I don't let it bother me. I sing at the top of my voice. 
It takes us more than half th e way home until they are satis- 
fied. Lou announces the final nu mber. The contribution to the 
net profit of the plant is an impr essive seven digits, a fact that 
doesn't deter him from specifyin g it down to the last cent. 
"Quite a profitable deal," I sa y. "And to think that Johnny 
was about to drop it. .. . What a strange world." 
"One thing for sure," Lou concludes. "You can't rely on 
marketing people to solve the ma rketing problems. They're cap- 
tured by old, devastating, common practices to an even larger 
extent than production. 
"Try to imagine," he continues, "the reaction of people when 
I start to explain to them they are the ones who believe too much 
in cost accounting." 
"Yes, I sigh. "Judging from today I shouldn't expect much 
help from these guys. Even th ough, you know, there might be 
something in Dick."  
Captured by Plamen T.
320
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Hard to tell," he comments. "Especially when Johnny is 
holding him so tightly under his thumb. Alex, how are you going 
to do it?" 
"Do what?" 
"Change the entire division?" 
That puts an end to my euphor ia. Damn you Lou, why did 
you have to bring it up? 
"God have mercy on me," I say. "Yesterday we were talking 
about inertia. We were complaining about the inertia that we 
have. Compare it to the inertia th at we are going to face in the 
division." 
Ralph laughs, Lou groans, and I feel pity for myself. 
This week, even though we made such impressive progress, 
one thing was definitely proven—I'm still managing by the seat of 
my pants. 
Take yesterday, for example. If it weren't for Ralph's instinct 
that something was missing, we wouldn't even have noticed the 
huge, open opportunities. Or toda y. How close was I to giving 
up? If it hadn't been for Lou pu tting us on the right track .... 
I must find out just what are the management techniques I 
should master. It's simply too risky not to. I must concentrate on 
it. I even know where to begin. . . . 
Maybe I was holding the key all along. What did I say to Julie 
in the restaurant? My own words echo in my head: "When did 
Jonah have the time to learn so much? As far as I know he never 
worked one day of his life in industry. He's a physicist. I can't 
believe that a scientist, sitting in his ivory tower, can know so 
much about the detailed realities of the shop floor." 
And then, the idea of 'scientist' came up again, when Lou 
and Ralph were arguing about the usefulness of classifying data. 
And I myself supplied the answer: How does one go about re- 
vealing the intrinsic order? Lou aske d it as if it is a rhetorical 
question, as if the obvious answer is that it is impossible. But 
scientists do reveal the intrinsic order of things . . . and Jonah is 
a scientist. 
Somewhere in the scientific method lies the answer for the 
needed management techniques. It is obvious. But what can I 
do? I cannot read a book in physi cs, I don't know enough mathe- 
matics to get through even the first page. 
But maybe I don't need it. Jonah stressed that he wasn't 
Captured by Plamen T.
321
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementasking me to develop the methods, just to determine clearly what 
they should be. Maybe popular science books would be sufficient? 
At least I should give it a try. 
I should go to the library and start digging. The first modern 
physicist was Newton, that's probably the place to start. 
I'm sitting in my office, my f eet up on the desk and staring 
blankly into the room. 
The entire morning, I got only two calls—both from Johnny 
Jons. First he called to inform me that the deal with the French is 
signed. He was very proud of the fact that he negotiated a better 
deal than expected; in return fo r the flexibility and immediacy of 
our response to their future requests, he succeeded in squeezing 
slightly higher prices. 
The second time he wanted to know if he could approach 
our domestic clients with the same concept. That is, to shoot for a 
long-term contract where only the overall yearly quantities are 
fixed, and we promise three weeks' delivery for any specific re- 
quest. 
I assured him that we don't have any problem responding, 
and encouraged him to go ahead. 
He's excited. I'm far from it. 
Everybody is busy. Launching this huge new deal has made 
them really busy. I'm the only one who has nothing to do. I feel 
redundant. Where are the days of the telephone ringing off the 
hook, when I had to run from one important issue to the other, 
when there were not enough hours in the day? 
All those calls and meetings were fire fighting. I remind my- 
self. No fires, no fighting. Now, everything is running smoothly— 
almost too smoothly. 
Actually, what bothers me is that I know what I should be 
doing. I need to guarantee that the current situation will con- 
tinue, that things are thought out in advance so fires will not 
break out. But this means finding the answer to Jonah's question. 
I stand up and leave. On my way out I say to Fran, "In the 
unlikely event that anyone needs me , I'll be at the public library." 
"Enough for today," I say and close the book. I stand up and 
stretch, "Julie, join me for a cup of tea?" 
"Good idea, I'll be with you in a minute."  
Captured by Plamen T.
322
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"You're really into it," I comment as she joins me at the 
kitchen table. 
"Yeah, it's fascinating." 
I hand her a steaming cup. "What can be so fascinating 
about ancient Greek philosophy?" I wonder aloud. 
"It's not what you think," she laughs. "These dialogues of 
Socrates are really interesting." 
"If you say so," I don't try to disguise my skepticism. 
"Alex, your perceptions are all wrong, it's not at all like what 
you think." 
"So what is it?" I ask. 
"Well, It's hard to explain," she hedges. "Why don't you try 
to read them yourself?" 
"Maybe one day I will," I say, "but for the moment I've 
enough reading to do." 
She takes a sip from her cup. "Did you find what you're 
looking for?" 
"Not exactly," I admit. "Reading popular science books 
doesn't lead you directly to management techniques. But I've 
started to see something interesting." 
"Yes?" she says encouragingly. 
"It's how physicists approach a subject; it's so vastly different 
from what we do in business. They don't start by collecting as 
much data as possible. On the contrary, they start with one phe- 
nomenon, some fact of life, almost randomly chosen, and then 
they raise a hypothesis: a speculation of a plausible cause for the 
existence of that fact. And here's the interesting part. It all seems 
to be based on one key relationship: IF ... THEN." 
Somehow this last sentence caus es Julie to straighten up in 
her chair. "Keep going," she says intensely. 
"What they actually do is to derive the unavoidable results 
logically from their hypothesis. They say: IF the hypothesis is 
right THEN logically another fact  must also exist. With these 
logical derivations they open up  a whole spectrum of other ef- 
fects. Of course the major effort is to verify whether or not the 
predicted effects do exist. As more and more predictions are veri- 
fied, it becomes more obvious that the underlying hypothesis is 
correct. To read, for example, how  Newton did it for the law of 
gravity is fascinating." 
"Why?" she asks, as if she knows the answer but is anxious to 
hear it from me.  
Captured by Plamen T.
323
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Things start to be connected to each other. Things that we 
never thought were related start to be strongly connected to each 
other. One single common cause is the reason for a very large 
spectrum of different effects. You know Julie, it's like order is 
built out of chaos. What can be  more beautiful than that?" 
With glittering eyes she asks, "Do you know what you have 
just described? The Socratic dialogues. They're done in exactly 
the same way, through exactly the same relationship, IF ... 
THEN. Maybe the only difference is that the facts do not concern 
material but human behavior." 
"Interesting, very interesting. Come to think about it," I say, 
"my field, management, involves both material and people be- 
havior. If the same method can be used for each then it's proba- 
bly the basis for Jonah's techniques." 
She thinks about it for a while. "You're probably right. But if 
you are then I'm willing to bet th at when Jonah starts to teach 
you those techniques you'll find  that they are much more than 
techniques. They must be thinking processes." 
We each dive into our thoughts. 
"Where do we take it from here?" 
"I don't know," I answer. "Frankly, I don't think that all this 
reading really gets me closer to answering Jonah's question. Re- 
member what he said? 'I'm not asking you to develop the man- 
agement techniques, only to determ ine what they should be.' I'm 
afraid I'm trying to jump to th e next step, to develop them. De- 
termining the management techni ques must come from the need 
itself, from examining how I currently operate and then trying to 
find out how I should operate."  
Captured by Plamen T.
324
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement39 
"Any messages?" I ask Fran. 
"Yes," she answers, to my surprise. "From Bill Peach. He 
wants to talk to you." 
I get him on the phone. "Hey Bill, what's up?" 
"I just received your number s for last month," he says. 
"Congratulations hotshot, you definitely made your point. I've 
never seen anything even remotely close to this." 
"Thank you," I say pleased. "By the way, what are the results 
at Hilton Smyth's plant?" 
"You must turn the dagger, huh?" he laughs. "As you pre- 
dicted, Hilton is not doing too well. His indicators continue to 
improve, but his bottom line cont inues to sink into the red." 
I cannot contain myself, "I told you that those indicators are 
based on local optimum and that they have nothing to do with 
the global picture." 
"I know, I know," he sighs. "As a matter of fact, I think that I 
knew it all along, but I guess an old mule like me needs to see the 
proof in black and red. Well, I th ink that I've finally seen it." 
"It's about time," I think to my self but to the phone I say, 
"So what's next?" 
"This is actually why I called yo u, Alex. I spent the entire day 
yesterday with Ethan Frost. It s eems that he's in agreement with 
you, but I can't understand what he is talking about." Bill sounds 
quite desperate. "There was a time that I thought I understood 
all this mumbo jumbo of 'cost of goods sold' and variances, but 
after yesterday, it's obvious that I don't. I need someone who can 
explain it to me in straight terms, someone like you. You do un- 
derstand all this, don't you?" 
"I think I do," I answer. "Actually  it is very simple. It's all a 
matter of. . . ." 
"No, no," he interrupts me. "Not on the phone. Besides, you 
have to come here anyway—only one month left, you should get 
familiar with the details of your new job." 
"Tomorrow morning okay?" 
"No problem," he answers. "And Alex, you have to explain 
t o  m e  w h a t  y o u ' v e  d o n e  t o  J o h n ny Jons. He goes around claim- 
Captured by Plamen T.
325
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementing that we can make a lot of money if we sell below what it costs 
us to produce. That is pure baloney." 
I laugh, "See you tomorrow." 
Bill Peach abandoning his precious indicators? This is some- 
thing I have to tell everyone; they' ll never believe it. I go to Don- 
ovan's office, but he's not there,  nor is Stacey. They must be on 
the floor. I ask Fran to locate them . In the meantime I'm going to 
Lou to tell him the news. 
Stacey reaches me there. "Hey boss, we have some problems 
here. Can we come in half an hour?" 
"No rush," I say. "It's not so  important, take your time." 
"I don't agree," she says. "I'm afraid that it is important." 
"What are you talking about?" 
"It probably has started," she an swers. "Bob and I will be in 
your office in half an hour. Okay?" 
"Okay," I say, quite puzzled. 
"Lou, do you know what's going on?" I ask. 
"No." he says. "Unless of course, you're referring to the fact 
that Stacey and Bob have been bu sy for the last week, playing 
expeditors." 
"They are?" 
"To make a long story short," Bob concludes the briefing of 
the last hour, "already twelve work centers are on unplanned 
overtime." 
"The situation is out of control," Stacey continues. "Yester- 
day one order was not shipped on time, today three more will be 
delayed for sure. According to Ra lph, we're going downhill from 
there. He claims that before th e end of the month we'll miss the 
shipping dates on about twenty per cent of our orders, and not by 
just one or two days." 
I'm looking at my phone. It wo n't take more than a few days 
and this monster will ring off th e hook with furious complaints. 
It's one thing to be consistently bad; the clients are used to it and 
they protect themselves by stocks  or time buffers. But now we 
have spoiled them, they are already used to our good perfor- 
mance. 
This is much worse than I've imagined. It might ruin the 
plant. 
How did it happen? Where did I go astray?  
Captured by Plamen T.
326
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"How come?" I ask them. 
"I told you," Bob says. "Order no. 49318 is stuck because 
of . . ." 
"No Bob," Stacey stops him. "I t's not the details that are 
important. We should look for the core problem. Alex, I think 
that we simply accepted more orders than we can process." 
"That's obvious," I say. "But how come? I thought we 
checked that the bottlenecks have enough capacity. We also 
checked your seven other problematic work centers. Did we make 
a mistake in the calculations?" 
"Probably," Bob answers. 
"Not likely," is Stacey's response. "We checked and double 
checked it." 
"So?" 
"So, I don't know," Bob says. "But it doesn't matter. We have 
to do something now, and fast." 
"Yes, but what?" I'm a little impatient. "As long as we don't 
know what caused the situation, the best we can do is to throw 
punches in all directions. That was our old mode of operation. I 
had hoped that we learned better." 
I accept their lack of response as agreement and continue, 
"Let's call Lou and Ralph and move into the conference room. 
We must put our heads together to figure out what is really going 
on." 
"Let's get the facts straight," Lou says after less than fifteen 
minutes. "Bob, are you convinced th at you need to keep using so 
much overtime?" 
"The efforts of the last few days have convinced me that even 
with overtime we are going to miss due dates," Bob answers. 
"I see," Lou doesn't look too happy. "Ralph, are you con- 
vinced that at the end of the month, in spite of the overtime, we 
are going to be late on many orders?" 
"If we don't find a smart way to solve this mess, without a 
doubt," Ralph answers confidentl y. "I can't tell you the dollar 
amount, that depends on Bob and Stacey's decisions of how 
much overtime to use and which or ders to expedite. But it is in 
the neighborhood of over a million dollars." 
"That's bad," Lou says. "I'll have to redo my forecast." 
I throw him a murderous look. That is the major damage 
that he sees? Redo the forecast!  
Captured by Plamen T.
327
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Can we address the real issu e?" I say in a freezing voice. 
They all turn to me waiting. 
"Listening again to what you're saying, I don't see a major 
problem," I say. "It is obvious that we tried to swallow more than 
w e  c a n  c h e w .  W h a t  w e  h a v e  t o  d o  i s  t o  d e t e r m i n e  b y  h o w  m u c h  
and then compensate. It is as simple as that." 
Lou nods his head in approval. Bob, Ralph, and Stacey con- 
tinue to look at me with poker faces. They even look offended. 
There must be something wrong in what I've said, but I can't see 
what. 
"Ralph, by how much are our bottlenecks overloaded?" I 
ask. 
"They're not overloaded," he says flatly. 
"No problem there," I conclude. "So let . . ." 
"He didn't say that," Stacey cuts me off. 
"I don't understand," I say. "If the bottlenecks are not over- 
loaded then . . ." 
Maintaining an expressionless face she says, "From time to 
time the bottlenecks are starved. Then the work comes to them in 
a big wave." 
"And then," Bob continues, "we don't have a choice but to 
go into overtime. That's the case  all over the plant. It looks like 
the bottlenecks are moving all the time." 
I sit quietly. What can we do now? 
"If it were as easy as determining some overloads," Stacey 
says, "don't you think we would easily solve it?" 
She is right. I should have more confidence in them. 
"My apologies," I mutter. 
We sit quietly for a minute. Then Bob speaks up, "We can't 
handle it by shuffling priorities  and going into overtime. We've 
already tried that for several days. It might help save some spe- 
cific orders but it throws the en tire plant into chaos and then 
many more orders are in trouble." 
"Yes," Stacey agrees. "Brute force seems to push us more 
and more into the spiral. That's why we asked for this meeting." 
I accept their criticism. 
"Okay, it's obvious that we have to approach it systematically 
Anyone got an idea where to begin?" 
"Maybe we should start by examining a situation where we 
have one bottleneck." Ralph suggests hesitantly. 
"What's the point?" Bob objects. "We now have the opposite. 
Captured by Plamen T.
328
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementWe are facing many, traveling bot tlenecks." It's apparent that 
they've had that discussion before. 
I don't have any other suggesti on, nor does anybody else. I 
decide to gamble on Ralph's hu nch. It worked in the past. 
"Please proceed," I say to Ralph. 
He goes to the board and takes the eraser. 
"At least don't erase the fi ve steps," Bob protests. 
"They don't seem to help us much," Ralph laughs nervously. 
"Identify the system's constraints," he reads. "That is not the 
problem now. The problem is that  the bottlenecks are moving all 
over the place." 
Nevertheless, he puts the eraser down and turns to the flip 
chart. He draws a row of circles. 
"Suppose that each circle represents a work center," he starts 
to explain. "The tasks are flowing from the left to the right. Now, 
let's suppose that this one is a bottleneck," and he marks one of 
the middle circles with a big X. 
"Very nice," says Bob sarcastically. "Now what?" 
"Now let's introduce Murphy into the picture," Ralph re- 
sponds calmly. "Suppose that Murphy hits directly on the bottle- 
neck." 
"Then the only thing left to do is to curse wholeheartedly," 
Bob spits. "Throughput is lost." 
"Correct," Ralph says. "But what happens when Murphy 
hits anywhere before the bottleneck? In such a case, the stream of 
tasks to the bottleneck is tempor arily stopped and the bottleneck 
is starved. Isn't this our case?" 
"Not at all," Bob brushes it away. "We never operated that 
way. We always make sure that some inventory accumulates in 
front of the bottleneck, so when an upstream resource goes down 
for some time, the bottleneck can continue to work. As a matter of 
fact, Ralph, we had so much inventory there that we had to choke 
the material release to the floor. Come on," he says impatiently, 
"that is exactly what you're doing on your computers. Why do we 
have to regurgitate what we all know by heart?" 
Ralph goes back to his seat. "I just wondered if we really 
know how much inventory we should allow to accumulate in 
front of the bottlenecks?" 
"Bob, he has a point," Stacey remarks. 
"Of course I have," Ralph is really annoyed. "We wanted 
three days' inventory in front of each bottleneck. I started with 
Captured by Plamen T.
329
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementreleasing material two weeks befo re it was due at the bottleneck. 
Then it turned out that that's too much, so I cut it to one week 
and everything was okay. Now it's not okay." 
"So increase it back," Bob says. 
"I can't," Ralph sounds desperat e. "It will increase our lead 
time beyond what we currently promise." 
"What's the difference?" Bob roar s. "In any event we're slid- 
ing on our promises." 
"Wait, wait," I cut into their quarrel. "Before we do anything 
drastic, I want to understand better. Ralph, let's go back to your 
picture. As Bob pointed out, we do hold some stock in front of 
the bottleneck. Now let's suppose that Murphy hits somewhere 
before the bottleneck, then what?" 
"Then," Ralph says patiently, "t he flow of parts to the bottle- 
neck stops, but the bottleneck, using the stock that accumulated 
right in front of it, continues to wo rk. Of course that eats into the 
stock and so, if we don't build enough stock to start with, the 
bottleneck might go down." 
"Something doesn't match." Stacey says. "According to what 
you just said, we have to guarant ee the uninterrupted work of the 
bottleneck by building stock that will last more than the time to 
overcome Murphy on the upstream resource." 
"Correct," says Ralph. 
"Don't you see that it can't be  the explanation?" Stacey says. 
"Why?" Ralph doesn't get it, and neither do I. 
"Because the time to overcome a problem upstream did not 
change, we haven't faced any major catastrophies lately. So if the 
stock was sufficient to protect th e bottlenecks before, it must be 
sufficient now as well. No Ralph, it's not a matter of insufficient 
stocks, it's simply new wandering bottlenecks." 
"I guess you're right." 
Maybe Ralph is convinced by St acey's argument, but I'm not. 
"I think that Ralph might be right after all," I say. "We just 
have to carry his line of thought a little further. We said that 
when one of the upstream reso urces goes down, the bottleneck 
starts to eat into its stock. Once the problem is corrected, what do 
all the upstream resources have to do? Remember, if there is one 
thing that we can be sure of, it's  that Murphy will strike again." 
"All upstream resources," Stacey answers, "now have to re- 
build the inventory in front of the bottleneck, before Murphy hits 
Captured by Plamen T.
330
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementagain. But what's the problem? We  released enough material for 
them." 
"It's not the material that con cerns me," I say. "It's the ca- 
pacity. You see, when the problem that caused the stoppage is 
overcome, the upstream resources not only have to supply the 
current consumption of the bottleneck, at the same time they 
have to rebuild the inventory." 
"That's right," Bob beams. "Tha t means that there are times 
when the non-bottlenecks must have more capacity than the bot- 
tlenecks. ./Vow I understand. The fact th at we have bottlenecks 
and non-bottlenecks is not because we designed the plant very 
poorly. It's a must. If the upstream resources don't have spare 
capacity, we won't be able to ut ilize even one single resource to 
the maximum; starvation will preclude it." 
"Yes," Ralph says. "But now the question is, how much spare 
capacity do we need?" 
"No, that is not the question," I gently correct him. "Just as 
your previous question, 'how much  inventory do we need?' is not 
the real question either." 
"I see," Stacey says thoughtfu lly. "It's a trade-off. The more 
inventory we allow before the bottleneck, the more time is avail- 
able for upstream resources to ca tch up, and so, on average, they 
need less spare capacity. The more inventory the less spare ca- 
pacity and vice versa." 
"Now it's clear what's happening," Bob continues. "The new 
orders have changed the balance. We took more orders, which by 
themselves didn't turn any reso urce into a new bottleneck, but 
they did drastically reduce the amount of spare capacity on the 
non-bottlenecks, and we didn't compensate with increased inven- 
tory in front of the bottleneck." 
Everybody agrees. As usual, when the answer finally emerges 
it's plain common sense. 
"Okay Bob," I say. "What do you think you should do now?" 
He takes his time. We wait. 
Finally he turns to Ralph and says, "We have outstanding 
promises for very short delivery times on only a small percent of 
our order intake. Can you identify those orders on an on-going 
basis?" 
"No problem," answers Ralph. 
"Okay," Bob continues. "For those orders, continue to re- 
lease material one week in advance.  For all others, increase it to 
Captured by Plamen T.
331
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementtwo weeks. Let's hope that that will be enough. Now, we have to 
rebuild the inventory in front of the bottlenecks and in front of 
assembly. Stacey, take all the nece ssary steps to put the plant, and 
I mean all the non-bottlenecks, to  work throughout the weekend. 
Don't accept any excuses, it's an emergency. I'll notify sales that 
until further notice they should not promise any delivery in less 
than four weeks from receipt of the order. It will jeopardize their 
new campaign, but that's life." 
Right in front of our eyes the baton has been passed. It's 
obvious who is the boss now. I feel  proud and jealous at the same 
time. 
"Bob has taken over very nicel y," Lou says as we enter my 
office. At least this front is covered." 
"Yes," I agree. "But I hate to put him in a position where his 
first independent actions are so negative." 
"Negative?" Lou asks. "What do you mean by negative?" 
"All the actions he is forced to take are leading in the wrong 
direction." I answer. "Of course, he doesn't have any choice, the 
alternative is much worse, but still. . . ." 
"Alex, I'm probably thicker than usual today, but I really 
don't understand. What do you mean by 'leading in the wrong 
direction?' ' 
"Don't you see?" I'm irritated by the whole situation. "What 
is the unavoidable result of telling sales that they should quote 
four weeks' delivery? Remember, just two weeks ago we went out 
of our way to persuade them to  quote two weeks. They didn't 
have much confidence then. Now, it will cause them to drop the 
entire sales campaign." 
"What else can we do?" 
"Probably nothing. But this doesn't change the end result; 
future throughput is down." 
"I see," says Lou. "On top of it , overtime is up significantly; 
putting the plant to work on the weekend will consume the entire 
overtime budget for the quarter." 
"Forget the budget," I say. "When Bob has to report it, I'll be 
the divisional president. The increa sed overtime is increasing op- 
erating expense. The point is that throughput will be down, op- 
erating expense will be up and in creasing the buffers means that 
inventory will be up. Everything is  moving in the opposite direc- 
tion of what it should."  
Captured by Plamen T.
332
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Yup," he agrees. 
"Somewhere, I've made a mistake," I say. "A mistake that 
now is causing us to pull back. You know Lou, we still don't know 
what we're doing. Our ability to s ee what's in front of us resem- 
bles that of moles. We're re acting rather than planning." 
"But you've got to agree that we are reacting much better 
than before." 
"That's not a real comfort Lo u, we're also moving much 
faster than before. I feel as if I'm driving looking only in the rear 
view mirror, and then, when it's almost too late, we make last 
minute course corrections. It's not  good enough. It is definitely 
not good enough."  
Captured by Plamen T.
333
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement40 
I'm driving back from headquarters with Lou. We've been 
doing this every day for the last two weeks. We are not in what 
one might call a cheerful mood. Now we know every little detail 
of what's going on in the division, and the picture doesn't look 
good at all. The only bright spot is my plant. No, I should get 
used to the fact that it's Donovan's plant. And it's not a bright 
spot, that's a gross understatement. It's the real savior. 
Donovan succeeded getting everything under control before 
the clients had any reason to compla in. It will take him some time 
to regain the confidence of our sa les people, but with me pressing 
from the other side it will not ta ke long before it will be okay. 
This plant is so good that Lou and I were led astray for some 
time. The reports on the division gave us the impression that the 
situation is quite good. Only when we went through the elaborate 
work of separating out Donovan's plant was the real picture ex- 
posed. And it's not pretty. It's actually quite disastrous. 
"Lou, I think we did the exact thing that we knew we 
shouldn't do." 
"What are you talking about?" he says. "We haven't done 
anything yet." 
"We have gathered data, tons of data." 
"Yes, and there's a problem with the data," he says. "Frankly, 
I've never seen such a sloppy pl ace. Every report is missing at 
least back-up details. You know what I found today? They don't 
even have a report on late receiva bles. The information is there 
but—can you believe—it's scattered in at least three different 
places. How can they operate this way?" 
"Lou, you're missing the point." 
"Am I? Do you know that with proper attention we can re- 
duce the open receivables by at least four days?" 
"And that will save the division," I say sarcastically. 
"No," he grins. "But it will help." 
"Will it?" 
When Lou doesn't answer I continue, "Do you really believe 
it will help? Look Lou, what have we learned? What did you 
yourself say when you asked for the job? Do you still remember?" 
Captured by Plamen T.
334
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementIrritated he says, "I don't know what you're talking about. 
Don't you want me to correct th ings which are obviously wrong?" 
How am I going to explain it to him? I try again. 
"Lou, suppose that you do succeed in collecting four days 
out of the open receivables. By ho w much will throughput, inven- 
tory, and operating expense be improved?" 
"They'll all be slightly improved," he says. "But the major 
impact will be on cash. You should n't sneeze at four days' cash. 
Besides, improving the division requires many small steps. If ev- 
eryone does his share, together we can lift it." 
I drive silently. What Lou said  makes sense, but somehow I 
know that he is wrong. Deadly wrong. 
"Lou, help me here. I know th at improving the division will 
require many small improvements, but . . ." 
"But what?" he says. "Alex, you are too impatient. You know 
what they say, Rome wa s not built in a day." 
"We don't have hundreds of years." 
Lou is right, I am impatient. But shouldn't I be? Did we save 
our plant by being patient? And then I see it. Yes, many small 
actions are needed, but that doesn't mean that we can afford to 
be satisfied with actions that improve the situation. We must care- 
fully choose which ones to con centrate on, otherwise. . . . 
"Lou, let me ask you. How much time will it take you to 
change, for internal purposes only,  the way that we evaluate in- 
ventory?" 
"The mechanical work is not a re al problem, that won't take 
more than a few days. But if you're  referring to the work it'll take 
to explain the ramifications, to explain to managers how this af- 
fects their day-to-day decisions, that's a different story. With con- 
centrated effort, I'd say it'll take weeks." 
Now I'm on solid ground. 
"What, do you think, is the im pact of the way we currently 
evaluate inventory on the levels of finished stocks that the divi- 
sion currently holds." 
"Significant," he says. 
"How significant," I press. "Can you give me a number?" 
"I'm afraid not. Not even a meaningful evaluation." 
"Let's try to do it together,"  I say. "Have you noticed the 
increase in finished goods that the division is holding?" 
"Yes, I have," he answers. "But why are you surprised? It's 
exactly what should be expected . Sales are down and the pres- 
Captured by Plamen T.
335
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementsure to show profits is up, so they build finished goods inventory 
to generate fictitious inventory profits. I see what you mean. We 
can take the increase in finished goods as an indicator of the 
impact of the way we value inventory. Wow, it's about seventy 
days!" 
"Lovely," I say. "Compare it to your four days of receivables. 
On what should you work? Moreover," I keep on hammering, 
"what is the impact on throughput?" 
"I don't see any," he answers. "I see very clearly the impact 
on cash, on inventory, and on operating expense, but not on 
throughput." 
"Don't you?" I say mercilessly. "What was the reason that 
they gave us for not introducin g the new models? Can you re- 
call?" 
"Yes," he says slowly. "They are convinced that introducing 
the new models will force them to declare all the old ones they're 
holding in stock as obsolete. That would cause a major blow to 
the bottom line." 
"So, we continue to offer the old stuff rather than the new. 
W e  c o n t i n u e  t o  l o s e  m a r k e t  s h a r e ,  b u t  i t ' s  b e t t e r  t h a n  t o  b i t e  t h e  
bullet of write-offs. Do you understand now the impact it has on 
throughput?" 
"Yes, I do. You are right. Bu t Alex, you know what? With 
some extra effort I think that I can handle them both. I can work 
on the problem of the way we value inventory and at the same 
time arrange for more attention to the receivables." 
He still doesn't get it but now I think I know how to handle 
it. 
"What about the plant indicators?" I ask him. 
"That's a real Pandora's box," he sighs. 
"What is the damage there? Slightly bigger than four days? 
And what about the fact that sales continue to judge opportuni- 
ties according to the formal 'pro duct cost' and desirable margins. 
Or even worse, that they will look for anything they can sell above 
variable cost. What's the damage there? And what about the 
transfer prices between us and the other divisions; that's a real 
killer. Do you want more?" 
"Stop, stop," he raised his hand s. "You made your point. I 
guess I was inclined to deal with  the open receivables issue just 
because there I know what to do, while in all the others . . ." 
"Afraid?" I ask.  
Captured by Plamen T.
336
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Frankly, yes." 
"So am I, so am I." I mutter. "Where do we start? Where do 
we continue? On what should we concentrate first, on what sec- 
ond? It's overwhelming." 
"We need a process," he says. "That's obvious. It's too bad 
that the five-step process that we developed turned out to be 
false. No . . . Wait a minute Alex , that's not the case. At the end, 
the problem was not wandering bot tlenecks. It was insufficient 
protection for the existing bottl enecks. Maybe we can use that 
five-step process?" 
"I don't see how, but it's worthwhile to check it. Should we 
head to the plant and give it a try?" 
"Certainly. I'll have to make some phone calls, but it's no 
problem." 
"No," I say. "I have some  commitments for tonight." 
"You're right," he says. "It's very important but not urgent. 
It can wait for tomorrow." 
"Identify the system's constraint(s)," Lou reads from the 
board. "Do we accept it as the first step?" 
"I don't know," I say. "Let's examine the logic that brought 
us to write it. Do you remember what it was?" 
"Roughly," he says. "It was something about the fact that we 
adopted throughput as the number-one measurement." 
"I'm afraid that roughly is not good enough," I say. "At least 
not at such an early stage in our analysis. Let's try again, from 
first principles." 
"I'm all for it," he groans, "But  what do you call first princi- 
ples?" 
"I don't know. Something basic that we accept without hesi- 
tation." 
"Fine. I have one for you. Ever y organization was built for a 
purpose. We haven't built any organization just for the sake of its 
mere existence." 
"Correct," I laugh. "Even though I know some people in 
some organizations who seem to forget it." 
"Washington, you mean?" 
"That too. I thought about our corporation, but who cares. 
Let's keep going. Another basic fact is that any organization is 
comprised of more than one person,  otherwise it's not an organi- 
zation." 
Captured by Plamen T.
337
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Correct," says Lou. "But I do n't see the point in all this. I 
can give you many more correct statements about organizations 
in general." 
"Yes, you probably can, but look  at the conclusion that we 
can derive already. If any orga nization was built for a purpose 
and any organization is composed of more than one person, then 
we must conclude that the pur pose of the organization requires 
the synchronized efforts of more than one person." 
"That makes sense," he says. "Otherwise we wouldn't need 
to create an organization; the e fforts of individuals would suffice. 
So?" 
"If we need synchronized efforts," I continue, "Then the 
contribution of any single person to  the organization's purpose is 
strongly dependent upon the performance of others." 
"Yes, that's obvious." With a bitter smile he adds, "Obvious 
to everybody except for our measurement system." 
Even though I wholeheartedly agree, I ignore his last com- 
ment. "If synchronized efforts are required and the contribution 
of one link is strongly depe ndent on the performance of the 
other links, we cannot ignore the fact that organizations are not 
just a pile of different links, they should be regarded as chains." 
"Or at least a grid," he corrects me. 
"Yes, but you see, every grid can be viewed as composed of 
several independent chains. The more complex the organization 
—the more interdependencies between the various links—the 
smaller number of independent chains it's composed of." 
Lou doesn't want to spend too much time on that point. "If 
you say so. But that's not so im portant. The important thing is 
you've just proven that any organization should be viewed as a 
chain. I can take it from here. Since the strength of the chain is 
determined by the weakest link, then the first step to improve an 
organization must be to identify the weakest link." 
"Or links," I correct. "Remember, an organization may be 
comprised of several independent chains." 
"Yes," he agrees impatiently. "But as you said, the complex- 
ity of our organizations almost guarantees that there are not 
many of them. In any event, it is taken care of by the S in paren- 
thesis that we put at the end of the word 'constraint'. Fine, Alex, 
what do we do about the measurements?" 
"Measurements?," I say in surprise. "Where did they come 
from?" 
Captured by Plamen T.
338
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"Didn't we agree yesterday that the distorted measurements 
are the biggest constraint of the division?" 
Bob Donovan is right. Lou certa inly has a fixation on mea- 
surements. "They are definitely a big problem," I say carefully. 
"But I'm not convinced that they are the constraint ." 
"You're not?" Lou is astonished. 
"No I'm not," I say firmly. "Do you think that the fact that 
most of our products are already outdated in comparison to what 
the competition is offering is  not a major problem? Don't you 
realize that the attitude in engi neering, claiming that the basic 
rule of nature is that a project never finishes on time, is an even 
bigger problem. And what about ma rketing, have you seen any 
marketing plan that has any ch ance of turning the situation 
around?" 
"No," he grins. "As a matter of fact everything that I've seen 
of long term planning should be  more appropriately categorized 
under 'long term bullshitting.' ' 
I'm on a roll. Today asking me about problems is like open- 
ing a dam. "Wait Lou, I haven't finished. What about the mental- 
ity that is so prevalent in headquarters, the mentality of covering 
your ass. Haven't you noticed that whenever we asked about 
something that doesn't go so well,  everyone almost automatically 
started to blame everybody else?" 
"How could I not notice. Okay, Alex, I get your point. There 
are major problems all over. It seems that in our division there is 
a whole herd of constraints, not just a few." 
"I still claim that there are only few constraints. Our division 
is too complex to have more than a very few independent chains. 
Lou, don't you realize that everything we mentioned so far is 
closely connected? The lack of sensible long-term strategy, the 
measurement issues, the lag in product design, the long lead 
times in production, the general attitude of passing the ball, of 
apathy, are all connected. We must put our finger on the core 
problem, on the root that causes them  all. That is what actually is 
meant by identify the constraint. It's not prioritizing the bad ef- 
fects, it's identifying what causes them all." 
"How are we going to do that? How are we going to identify 
the divisional constraints?" 
"I don't know," I say. "But if we succeeded in doing it here, 
in our plant, it must be possible to do in the division." 
He thinks about it for a minute and then says, "I don't think 
Captured by Plamen T.
339
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementso. Here we were lucky. We were dealing with physical con- 
straints, with bottlenecks, that's easy. But at the divisional level 
we'll have to deal with measurements, with policies, with proce- 
dures. Many of them are cast already into behavioral patterns." 
"I don't see the difference," I disagree. "Here we had to deal 
with all of the above. Come to think about it, even here the con- 
straints were never the machines. Yes, we called and still call the 
oven and the NCX10 bottlenecks, but if they were true bottle- 
necks how come we succeeded to squeeze almost twice as much 
out of them as before? How come we increased throughput so 
much without buying more capacity?" 
"But we changed almost ever y aspect of how we operate 
them, and how we operate everything around them." 
"That is exactly my point," I sa y. "What aspect of operation 
did we change?" Mimicking his voice I answer, "The measure- 
ments, the policies, the procedures. Many of them were cast into 
behavioral patterns. Lou, don't you see? The real constraints, 
even in our plant, were not the machines, they were the policies." 
"Yes, I do see. But still there are differences," he says stub- 
bornly. 
"What differences? Name one." 
"Alex, what's the use of pushin g me to the corner? Don't you 
see that there must be major differences? If there weren't, how 
come we don't even have a clue of what the nature of the divi- 
sional constraint is?" 
That stops me dead. 
"Sorry. You're right. You know , Lou, maybe we were lucky 
here. We had physical constraint s that helped us to focus our 
attention, to zoom in on the real  policy constraint. That isn't the 
case in the division. Over there we have excess capacity going 
through our ears. We have excess engineering resources that we 
succeed so brilliantly in wasting. I' m sure that there is no lack of 
markets. We simply don't know how to put our act together to 
capitalize on what we have." 
Pacified he says, "That brings us to the real question, how 
does one go about identifying the system's constraint? How can 
we zoom in on the most devastating erroneous policies. Or, to use 
your term, how does one go about identifying the core problem, 
the one that is responsible for the existence of so many undesir- 
able effects?" 
"Yes," I agree, "That's the question, no doubt." 
Captured by Plamen T.
340
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement Looking at the board I add, "W hat's written here is still 
valid. Identifying the system's constraint is the first step. What we 
now understand is that it also  translates into a mandatory de- 
mand for a technique by which to do it. Lou, that's it. We found 
it." 
The excitement causes me to stand up. "Here it is," I an- 
nounce, "here is the answer to Jo nah's question. I'm going to call 
him right now. You can imagine my first sentence: Jonah, I want 
you to teach me how to identify the core problem." 
As I turn to leave I hear Lou, "Alex, I think that it might be a 
little premature." 
"Why?" I ask, my hand on the doorknob. "Do you have any 
doubt that that is what  I must learn first?" 
"No," he says. "On that I'm quite  convinced. I just think that 
maybe you should ask for more. Knowing the core problem ex- 
actly might be far from sufficient." 
"You are right again," I calm down. "It's just that I was look- 
ing for the answer for so long." 
"I understand, believe me, I understand," he smiles. 
"Okay Lou." I sit down. "What else do you think I should 
ask Jonah to teach me?" 
"I don't know," he answers. "But if the five steps are valid, 
maybe what you should ask for are the techniques required to 
enable us to carry those steps out. We already found the need for 
one technique, why don't we continue to examine the other four 
steps?" 
"Good idea," I say enthusiastic ally. "Let's proceed. The sec- 
ond step is," I read from the bo ard, "decide how to exploit the 
system's constraints. That doesn't make any sense to me. What is 
the point in trying to exploit an erroneous policy?" 
"It makes sense only if the constraint is physical, but since we 
do deal with policy constraints, I guess we'd better move to the 
next one," Lou agrees with me. 
"Subordinate everything else to the above decision," I read. 
"Same reservation. If the constrai nt is not physical this step is 
meaningless. The fourth step is, 'Elevate the system's con- 
straint^).' Hmm, what are we going to do with this one?" 
"What's the problem?" Lou asks. "If we identify an errone- 
ous policy we should elevate it, we should change the policy." 
"How lovely. You make it sound so simple," I say sarcasti- 
Captured by Plamen T.
341
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementcally. "Change the policy! To what? Is  i t  s o  s i m p l e  t o  f i n d  a  s u i t -  
able replacement? Maybe for you, Lou, not for me." 
"For me neither," he grins. "I know that cost accounting is 
erroneous, but that doesn't mean  I've completely figured out 
what to replace it with. Alex, how does one go about correcting 
an erroneous measurement or any other policy?" 
"First, I think that you need the light-bulb idea, the break- 
through. The management techniques that Jonah talks about 
must include the ability to trigger such ideas, otherwise those 
techniques can't be used by mere  mortals. You know, Lou, Julie 
predicted that as I come to it I'll recognize that we are not dealing 
just with techniques but actual ly with thinking processes." 
"It started to look like it," Lou agrees. "But triggering break- 
through ideas by itself is not enou gh. An even bigger obstacle is to 
verify that this idea really solves all the resulting bad effects." 
"Without creating new ones," I add. 
"Is it possible at all?" Lou sounds very skeptical. 
"It must be, if we want to plan  rather than just react." As I 
talk I find a much better answer. "Yes, Lou, it must be possible. 
Look what happened to us with  our solution of getting more 
sales. As a direct result of the French order we threw the plant 
into a very unpleasant two weeks and we killed or at least delayed 
a good marketing campaign. If we just thought systematically be- 
fore we implemented it, rather t han after the fact, we could have 
prevented many problems. Don't tell me that it was impossible. 
All the facts were known to us, we simply didn't have a thinking 
process that would force and guide us to examine it early in the 
game." 
"What do we change to?" Lou says. 
That throws me off balance. "Pardon me?" 
"If the first thinking process should lead us to answer the 
question 'what to change?' the second thinking process should 
lead us to answer the question 'what to change to?' I can already 
see the need for a third thinking process." 
"Yes, so can I. 'How to cause the change.' " Pointing to the 
fifth step I add, "with the amount of inertia that we can expect in 
the division, the last one is probably the most important." 
"So it seems," Lou says. 
I stand up and start to pace. "Do you understand what we 
are asking for?" I cannot contain my feelings. "We are asking for 
Captured by Plamen T.
342
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementthe most fundamental things and at  the same time we are asking 
for the world." 
"I've lost you," Lou says quietly. 
I stop and look at him. "What are we asking for? For the 
ability to answer three simple que stions: 'what to change?', 'what 
to change to?', and 'how to cause the change?' Basically what we 
are asking for is the most fundamental abilities one would expect 
from a manager. Think about it. If a manager doesn't know how 
to answer those three questions, is he or she entitled to be called 
manager?" 
Throughout Lou signals that he is following me. 
"At the same time," I continue, "can you imagine what the 
meaning is to being able to hone in on the core problem even in a 
very complex environment? To be able to construct and check 
solutions that really solve all negative effects without creating new 
ones? And above all to cause such a major change smoothly, with- 
out creating resistance but the opposite, enthusiasm? Can you 
imagine having such abilities?" 
"Alex, that is what you have done. That's exactly what you 
have done in our plant." 
"Yes and no," I answer. "Yes, th at's what we have done. No 
Lou, without Jonah's guidance all of us would be looking for new 
jobs today. Now I understand why he refused to continue advis- 
ing us. Jonah said it to me in the clearest way. We should learn to 
be able to do it without any ex ternal help. I must learn these 
thinking processes, only then will I know that I'm doing my job." 
"We should and can be our own Jonahs," Lou says and 
stands up. Then this reserved person surprises me. He puts his 
arm around my shoulder and says, "I'm proud to work for you." 
Captured by Plamen T.
343
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementAN INTERVIEW WITH 
ELI GOLDRATT AND OTHERS  
by David Whitford, 
Editor at Large, Fortune Small Business.  
 
DW: The Goal was published 20 years ago. Since then a lot has 
changed in operations. New, powerful methodologies to im- 
prove operations, such as LEAN and Six Sigma, are widespread. 
The emphasis on reducing lead time and improving due-date 
performance has become the norm. Even The Goal's subtitle - a 
process of ongoing improvement - is a statement that is now 
taken for granted by every organization. 
So, my first question: Is The Goal still relevant?  
EG: How does a scientist go about judging the relevancy of a particu- 
lar body of knowledge? I believe that the decisive way is to choose 
an organization where all the compet ing knowledge is implemented. 
We should choose a large company that is already using all the new 
methodologies you mentioned; an organization that is using these 
methodologies so extensively that there is an institutionalized orga- 
nizational structure - like a formal  "black-belt" central office. The 
next step is to choose a significant  section of that organization, and 
properly implement in it the body of knowledge in question. In our 
case it will mean implementing TOC in  one of the plants of that large 
company. Then, compare the perfor mance of the chosen plant with 
the 
performance of the rest of the orga nization. Now we are able to reach 
a conclusion: if no real difference is  detected then the conclusion will 
be that the examined body of knowledge in question is not relevant. 
But, if there is a decisive difference, then the conclusion must be that 
the examined body of knowledge has relevancy; the bigger and more 
significant the difference, th e more relevant it is.  
Captured by Plamen T.
344
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementDW: Did you conduct such an experiment? And if so can you 
tell us about the results?  
EG: Fortunately, I don't have to initiate such experiments, since many 
readers of The Goal are kind enough to write to me and share their 
experiences. From the letters that I received over the years let's pick 
one that fits our conditions. Since we  are discussing relevancy, it must 
be a recent letter. It should be from a person who implemented TOC 
in a plant that is part of a large enough organization,  an organization 
that is using black-belts. And it should contain comparisons between 
that plant and all other plants of that company. 
 
Judge for yourself if this letter fits our bill perfectly. 
Dow Corning Corporation  
Healthcare Industries Materials Site 
635 N. Gleaner Road 
Hemlock, MI 48626 
May 20, 2004 
Dear Dr. Goldratt: 
 
I wanted to share wi th you what we have accomplished within 
our organization by using the tools presented in your books, 
"The Goal" and "It's Not Luck." 
When a colleague gave me a c opy of "The Goal," the plant 
at which I work was in a simila r situation as Alex's plant in 
the book. At that time, in 1998 , our plant's on-time delivery 
was approximately 50%. We were  carrying over 100 days of 
inventory and we had customer s on allocation because we 
could not meet the demand for orders. In addition, our man- 
agement had given us six months  to turn things around, or 
else. I was the new production te am leader for approximately 
thirty percent of the plant sale s and forty percent of the plant 
production employees. My units performance was similar to 
the plant's overall performance. 
As I read "The Goal" I quickly realized one person alone could 
Captured by Plamen T.
345
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementnot solve the problems within my  unit, or within our plant. I 
ordered several copies of "The Goal," and my colleague and 
I distributed them to our production manager, plant manager 
and manufacturing and quality engineers. Everyone was eager 
for a solution to our problems. 
Within my unit we identified the bottleneck and began to focus 
our resources there. Our plant is a non-union facility and many 
of the workers were also interested in what we were doing. I 
ordered copies of "The Goal" for everyone who worked for 
me. By the time the six-month ultimatum came, my unit and 
another had started to make significant changes, and the plant 
was spared any ill recourse. However, the expectation was 
that we would continue to improve. For the five years that 
followed, we continued to work  on breaking our bottlenecks. 
When one moved, we attacked it again. We got pretty good, 
and could determine where the bottleneck would occur next. 
Eventually, the bottleneck moved outside our plant as depicted 
in "The Goal." However, we knew this would happen ahead 
of time and had already begun the indoctrination of our sales 
and marketing group. 
I recently moved out of production,  but before I left, the results 
within my unit were: cycle time reduction of ~85°/o. Operator 
headcount reductions of 35% through attrition; no layoffs were 
needed. Work in process and finished goods inventory down 
~70%. On-time delivery went from ~50% to ~90% and the 
number of material handling steps were cut by over half. Our 
plant, and business unit have done very well too. And me, I 
received a promotion while in t hat position, and a compensa- 
tion award. Dow Corning, like many other corporations, has 
downsized multiple times in the past five years. During each 
one, our plant, and business unit were affected very little or 
completely passed over. I am co nvinced that if we hadn't 
read and followed the methods in "The Goal" and "It's Not 
Luck" the situation would be much different today. There is 
still much to do, as our business unit is the only one to really 
have embraced "The Goal." I am hoping in my new role in 
Six Sigma that I can further sh are your tools and methods. 
Captured by Plamen T.
346
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementThank you for signing the book Dr. Sirias has forwarded to 
you on my behalf. I am honored. 
Sincerely, 
Robert (Rob) Kain P.E. 
Six Sigma Black Belt 
Dow Corning Corporation 
Life Sciences/Specialty Chemical Business 
DW: Impressive, but why is only one business unit of Dow Corn- 
ing using TOC? What bothers me is that this person is talking 
about a span of over five years. If it worked so well, why didn't 
it spread to the other business units? Is it the Not-Invented-Here 
(NIH) syndrome? 
EG: Before we dive into specula tion about psychology of organiza- 
tions, let's examine the facts. We are talking about a middle manager 
who works in one corner of a la rge company. Why should we be 
surprised that, in five years, this pe rson was not yet able to take his 
whole company through a major para digm shift? And, by the way, 
as you read in his letter, he is making nice progress; he has already 
moved into a much more influential position. 
DW: Still, even with enough time, is it possible for a middle 
manager to influence his whole company?  
EG: Yes. But of course, such a person will need a lot of stamina and 
patience. 
DW: What makes you so sure that it is possible at all?  
EG: What evidence will convince you that it is possible? 
DW: Give me an example of a middle level manager working 
for a large company who has succeeded in institutionalizing 
the usage of the know-how written in The Goal. I mean institu- 
tionalizing it across the board.  
EG: Given that General Motors is the largest manufacturing company 
in the world, you should get an outstanding proof by interviewing 
Captured by Plamen T.
347
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementKevin Kohls.   (Eli Goldratt interview to be continued.)  
 
Interview with Kevin Kohls General Motors  
Director of Throughput Analysis and Simulation for North 
American Assembly Plants. 
DW: What drove you to seek help from The Goal?  
KK: It goes back almost 15 years, when I was starting off as a controls 
engineer at the Cadillac Detroit-Hamtramck assembly plant, just re- 
turning from Purdue University after completing a masters degree in 
electrical engineering. When I left  a year and half earlier, the plant 
was just starting production. When I returned, they had yet to hit 
their production targets; in fact they were far short. As you might 
imagine, everyone was frustrated about not hitting these targets, and 
there was a lot of effort being expended to improve the system, with 
minimal results. 
I was frustrated as well. The solutions I was putting in place rarely had 
a significant impact on the production of the plant, and it wasn't clear 
why. About that same time, Dave  VanderVeen from GM Research 
made a presentation to Larry Tibbe tts, who was then plant manager. 
Dave was promoting a research tool that he said would help improve 
throughput in the plant. Larry was very impressed, and asked me 
to go see Dave to find out if we could use this tool at Hamtramck. 
When I went down to the Research  Building at the GM Tech Center 
in Warren, Dave explained what a bottleneck was and how his tool 
identified it. He handed me a copy of The Goal and said if you want 
to understand bottlenecks and how to  improve throughput, this is the 
book to read. 
I took the book home and started to read it right away. The first thing 
that surprised me was that it was written in novel format. The second 
was how much I could identify with  what was happening in Alex's 
plant. I finally had to put it down at 2 A.M. so I could get some sleep, 
but I finished it the next day. I wa nted to apply the concepts immedi- 
ately, so I began collecting data fr om the systems we had, and putting 
it into the bottleneck program. After about a week of effort, I was 
fairly 
certain I had found the bottleneck. The scary part is that it was not 20 
feet away, on the production line right outside my office! 
Captured by Plamen T.
348
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementDW: What was the problem?  
KK: It was an operation where they we re installing the fuzzy, felt-like 
material that goes in the ceiling of  the car—very big and very clunky. 
Our data said that the mean cycles  between failures was about five 
minutes, and the mean time to re pair was about a minute. I was 
amazed that the line was stopping that often, and thought maybe the 
data was wrong, so we went and looked for ourselves. Sure enough, 
we watched the operator run for fi ve cycles, stop the line, walk away, 
pick up five more of these big, bulky items—they weren't heavy but 
they were big—drag them back, restart the line, and continue to install 
them. Every five cycles she would stop the line. Was it considered 
a major problem before we looked at it? No. It's not like we were 
losing an hour straight of production because something had broken 
down. We were only losing one mi nute. But it was happening every 
five cycles. 
We could see immediately why the material wasn't closer to the 
line. There was a supervisor's offi ce in the way. We found out there 
had been a request made some time  ago to move the office, but it 
was considered very low priority and it wasn't getting done. So I got 
the office moved, and lo and behold, throughput of the entire plant 
went up, which was a surprise, beca use my experience told me that 
I couldn't expect that. Then we used the software to find the next 
bottleneck and continued on with that process until we were making 
our throughput goals very steadily, every day. That was a real change 
in the way that plant operated. 
DW: Did you take your insights to other GM plants?  
KK: Yes. We demonstrated the process when central office manage- 
ment visited the plant, and it beca me apparent a lot of plants in GM 
weren't hitting their throughput targets. Eventually, I left Detroit- 
Hamtramck and went to a central office position to help start a divi- 
sional group to implement this solution. Seventeen years later, I'm an 
executive at GM who owns the pro cess for all of the North American 
plants, and it has been expanded to  include the simulation of future 
manufacturing designs. 
DW: And this is all TOC related?   
Captured by Plamen T.
349
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementKK: Yes, but there are other disciplines involved. You have to un- 
derstand simulation, and how it predicts throughput, and why it's 
important to understand where the bottleneck will be for a future 
design. But TOC is the basis for wh at we do. I still teach a two-day 
course. We might go to a plant and train the whole staff in how to 
use TOC concepts. I always give out copies of The Goal ahead of time 
and ask them to read it before the training. It's gotten to the point in 
manufacturing, however, where there are not that many people left to 
go through the training. My internal  customers are usually very savvy 
now about TOC, bottlenecks, data co llection and analysis. So I rarely 
have to sell the concept anymore. Demand for data collection imple- 
mentation to drive the bottleneck software, for example, exceeds our 
ability to install. And while I'm re sponsible for GM North America, 
this week alone I have people in  China and in Europe working on 
these kinds of issues. 
DW: How has your use of TOC concepts changed over the 
years?  
KK: What we found when we first started out is that we were dealing 
with the low-hanging fruit. You look  at that first example I told you 
about, and it was very obvious that the office was in the way, and the 
solution was just to move it. Over time, the solutions to the problems 
have become a lot more difficult to find. This doesn't mean you can't 
solve them, it just means you might have to use more scientific tech- 
niques. Now I might have to apply statistical methods as opposed to 
simple observation to understand what's driving the problem at a 
work station. 
Another thing we're doing lately is applying what we've learned from 
The Goal to the design of new plants and production lines. In -effect, 
we're solving problems before they arise. Eli Goldratt hasn't spent 
a lot of time talking about using TOC in that way, but we've taken 
his concepts and adopted them to our needs. That's been the beauty 
of it for me. If you understand th e logic and the reason behind the 
methodology, then you can a pply that stuff continuously. 
DW: It's interesting that a way of thinking about production 
problems that you found useful 15 years ago you still find useful 
today. Does that surprise you?   
Captured by Plamen T.
350
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementKK: Yes and no. The Theory of Constr aints is a very scientific, logical 
process. And because of that, when the game changes you can always 
go back to the logic. Originally we just had to find the bottleneck, 
walk out there, ask three or four questions, and we knew what to go 
and do. Now we can change the way we design whole manufactur- 
ing processes to make sure they're better from the start. But the logic 
behind TO C—the conflict clouds, the current reality trees, the way we 
ask questions to uncover the c onstraint—all that still applies. 
I think the problem with too many other approaches is that once the 
first layer of problems goes away, and the crisis no longer exists, then 
it's, "Phew! We're done!" In the TO C world, you find yourself asking, 
"Where has the constraint gone, and what can I do to help break it?" 
So you're never done. 
I'd like to be able to tell you that  as soon as I st arted telling people 
about these concepts, the whole org anization immediately changed to 
the new paradigm. The fact is that it  has taken years to get the process 
going, and the leverage to make im provements is still significant, es- 
pecially in a company as large as General Motors. It's much like the 
flywheel concept discussed in Good to Great, by Jim Collins. It's taken 
a while to get the flywheel turning, bu t it's starting to go at a pretty 
good clip right now! 
 
Interview with Eli Goldratt continued...  
DW: At Dow Corning it took about 5 years for TOC to spread 
from one section to a whole business unit In General Motors 
it took over ten years to be institutionalized throughout North 
A m e r i c a .  D o e s  i t  a l w a y s  t a k e  y e a r s  t o  s p r e a d  f r o m  t h e  o r i g i n  
to the whole company?  
EG: Not necessarily. It depends on who took the initiative. If the ini- 
tiative was taken by a middle level manager, it naturally takes much 
longer compared to the many cases where the initiative was taken by 
a top manager. What is amazing is th at the complexity of the organiza- 
tion is playing almost no role. In ve ry large and complex organizations 
it takes TOC about the same time to  become the dominant culture as 
it takes in small, relative ly simple organizations.  
Captured by Plamen T.
351
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementDW: Can you give an example?  
EG: In order to prove my point le t's take an extreme example. An 
example of an operation that is no t only large and complex but also 
dominated by large uncertainties - a repair depot of the United States 
Marine Corps. This depot is overhauling helicopters. It's very large 
- several thousand people. It is very complex - the helicopters are 
disassembled to the smallest pieces. Even the paint is sandblasted 
off. Whatever has to be repaired is repaired. Whatever has to be 
replaced is replaced. And then yo u reassemble the whole airplane. 
One has to make sure that certain parts which were taken from the 
original airplane go back on the same airplane. What makes it even 
more complex is the fact that two intrinsically different modes of 
operation have to be synchronized.  The disassembly/assembly lines 
are a multi-project environment. Th e repair shops that feed the lines 
are a production environment, and the two must work in tandem. 
The real challenge is the fact th at the whole operation is dominated 
by high uncertainty - one doesn't know the content of the work until 
the helicopter is disassembled and inspected. Surprises all over the 
place. A real nightmare. Still, it took the commander less than a year 
to implement TOC. An implementation that was so solid that the 
process of on-going improvement continues with his successors. 
 
 
Interview with Robert Leavitt, Colonel, 
United States Marine Corps retired.  
Manager, Sierra Management Technologies  
DW: You were responsible for implementing a TOC-based 
program in the Marine Corps?  
RL: Yes, when I was commanding o fficer at the Naval Air Depot in 
Cherry Point, North Carolina. I started the implementation there, 
which they have continued. As a colonel I had in essence a $625 
million company and 4,000 people working for me. Everybody says 
the government is always the last to get the message. I don't know if 
that's true. My personal belief is that the government gives guys like 
me the opportunity to try things a little differently. 
DW: Tell us about your implementation.  
 
Captured by Plamen T.
352
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementRL: We had problems delivering H-46s on time. The H-46 is a 25-to 
30-year-old Boeing helicopter used extensively in the Marine Corps 
as part of their assault support role. Because the airplane is so old and 
in frequent need of maintenance, anything over a single-digit number 
of airplanes on our hangar deck me ant that you took a shadow off 
the flightline. If you took a shadow off the flightline, that meant they 
didn't have an airplane to do thei r mission. Our negotiated norm for 
turnaround time was 130 days, and on average we were somewhere 
between 190 and 205 days. 
DW: Sounds like you had a problem.  
RL: A problem, yes. So we implemented critical chain, and ultimately 
cut the number of airplanes in flow from 28 to 14. We were able to 
sell that to our customers. And th e turnaround time went from 200 
days to about 135. Now that in and of itself is probably a significant 
improvement. But at the same time we were starting the process, they 
added 30 days more worth of corrosi on work to be done to the cabin. 
We accommodated the 30 days within that 135-day delivery. So we 
went from what would have been about 230 or 240 days to 135. 
DW: Why did this approach work where others had failed?  
RL: We had looked at a lot of the project management solutions, 
including material resource planning (MRP). TOC was the one that 
worked from all dimensions; building teamwork, understanding vari- 
ability, and with a grounding in scie ntific thought. It was a holistic 
approach to solving the problems. It looked at the entire system and 
said, hey, once you find the key le verage point you'll get some sig- 
nificant returns. And then you can go back and find the next leverage 
point, or constraint. 
DW: Did it take you a long time to find the constraint?  
RL: No, it didn't. And within about 120 days we were already begin- 
ning to see the results. 
DW: What was the constraint that you found? 
RL: It was the schedule—the way the schedule was developed. The 
Captured by Plamen T.
353
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementbiggest thing was the way we applied available resources; it didn't 
make any sense. The estimators and  evaluators really had about two 
days worth of work and they were taking about 14. We figured out 
what was going on—why that was a problem, why the scheduler set 
that up—and then reorganized. 
DW: Bottom line?  
RL: Well, the way it worked with the government, we were funded 
for a certain number of airplanes each year. We started burning 
through the backlog and we actually produced a few extra airplanes. 
I know from talking to the new co mmanding officer down there that 
they've increased the amount of pr oduct every year as they've gone 
forward. 
DW: And you had another example?  
RL: I also implemented TOC in the tail rotor blade cell at Sikorsky 
Aircraft, the overhaul and repair division. We were averaging some- 
where between 15 and 19 tail rotor blades a month. It took us about 
73 days to finish a tail rotor blade and we had as many as 75 or 80 tail 
rotor blades in flow. Well, we changed the flow to more than 30 tail 
rotor blades in process, which means our turnaround time actually 
was about 28 days. 
DW: How quickly did this improvement occur?  
RL: Three months. Now you can understand why I'm trying to build 
a consulting practice around TOC. 
 
 
Interview with Eli Goldratt continued...  
DW: I'd say almost everybody I've talked to who has read The 
Goal agrees with its messages. It also seems clear that many 
readers believe TOC to be founded on solid common sense. 
So why doesn't everybody implement TOC right away? Is it 
because TOC demands that cost accounting be discarded? Do 
the financial managers block the implementations?  
EG: Not at all. The notion that financial managers try to protect cost 
Captured by Plamen T.
354
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementaccounting is completely false. As a matter of fact, financial managers 
are the only type of managers that knew, much before TOC, the fal- 
lacies of cost accounting. Moreover , in almost any company, the VP 
of finance is one of the few manager s who sees the overall picture and 
is extremely frustrated to witness so many devastating local optima 
decisions which do not view the orga nization as a whole. What we see 
in reality is the exact opposite; the financial managers rarely oppose 
TOC. On the contrary, in many (if not most) implementations, they 
are the driving force. 
DW: That's hard to believe. Can I interview such an enlightened 
financial manager? 
EG: As many as you want. As I sa id, such financial managers are the 
norm rather than the exception. 
 
 
Interview with Craig Mead, Book Manufacturing  
Vice President Finance, Thomson-Shore, Dexter, Michigan. 
DW: Tell me about Thomson-Shore.  
CM: We're in Dexter, Michigan, just outside Ann Arbor. Approxi- 
mately 40% of our customers are un iversity presses. We would be 
considered a short-run printer, meaning we print runs of between 200 
and 10,000 copies. We're also an  ESOP company-98% of the stock 
is owned by the employees. We've had as many as 300 employees. 
Right now we're at 280. 
DW: I understand that everybody in your company has read 
The Goal.  
CM: We made it mandatory re ading for all our employees. 
DW: Top to bottom? 
CM: Yes. 
DW: So what was the problem you were trying to correct with 
the help of The Goal  
 
Captured by Plamen T.
355
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementCM: Our main problem was with on-time delivery. We also had 
problems with a department-type me ntality at the company. People 
had a hard time looking beyond th eir departmental responsibilities. 
Everybody was functional in thought. 
DW: Were you able to turn things around?  
CM: Yes. Before we started, we we re at around a 70% on-time deliv- 
ery. After implementing the TOC policies and practices, we got up 
to around 95%. 
DW: Your first step was to have everyone read The Goal?  
CM: Yes, that was the first step. Th e next step was to bring in a TOC 
consultant. We put 30 people through a three-day training course on 
Theory of Constraints. From there th e leadership group identified what 
we thought was the constraint and began to follow the Five Steps. 
DW: What was the constraint you identified?  
CM: In our business we have two area s of major investment One is in 
the press room and one is in the bindery. We basically settled on the 
press room as the constraint and began to manage the business with 
that in mind. As we focused on th e constraint and began to subordi- 
nate everything else to that, we began to break down departmental 
barriers. It took a lot of education and training. We developed our 
own internal course for employees. Basically we took the three-day 
course, pared it down to about an  hour, and had every employee go 
through that. The course dealt with the major concepts of constraint 
management, subordination, flowin g work, and removing localized 
thought processes. 
DW: What changes did you make in the press room?  
CM: We chartered some teams to look  at the various products that we 
made and began to challenge assumptions on how we use the presses. 
We make two types of books, a perfect-bound paperback book and a 
casebound hardcover book. We have sheet-fed and web presses. We 
began to devise rules on what type  of books went on what pieces of 
equipment, to maximize the capacities of the equipment and to meet 
Captured by Plamen T.
356
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementcustomers' needs. By creating new standards we eliminated an incred- 
ible amount of waste. Before, we were constantly reworking jobs to 
meet what we thought were customer  needs. In reality it was forever 
putting us farther and farther behind. Rethinking all our assumptions 
forced us to discipline ourselves and to maximize each component in 
the press room. That allowed us to flow the work more consistently. 
DW: How did you involve the employees?  
CM: Employees at Thomson-Shore ha ve the ability to influence the 
standards and the way work moves with in their area of expertise. When 
you're strictly localized in your thinking, every person wants the job 
designed to benefit themselves. And that creates chaos. Before we did 
our TOC implementation, we could never agree on anything without 
a long, involved discussion. If we wanted to make a change we had 
to get 12 people in a room and then try to reach a compromise on 
everything. We could never please everybody. Having everyone read 
The Goal helped everyone understand that the basis for everything we 
do wasn't localized thinking anymore.  So, for example, if a job had to 
spend a little more time in the bindery, that's okay, as long as that's 
what's most effective for the press, which we had identified as the 
major 
constraint. In the end we got the throughput that we needed. 
DW: As a finance guy, what was your specific contribution?  
CM: The Theory of Constraints is built on the premise of breaking 
the barriers of the cost model of accounting, and we were a heavily 
cost-driven organization, as a lot of manufacturing companies are. 
Everything in the company was designed as the cost-system would 
dictate. That's where I began to add value—by helping to develop dif- 
ferent measurement tools that we co uld use instead of the traditional 
cost tools. And that's what I believe began to drive real change in 
the organization. We are still struggling on the sales side but we've 
made progress in breaking away from the cost method of sales and 
estimating. 
DW: How does that work?  
CM: The cost method of accounting  creates departments and it al- 
locates indirect overhead expenses. TOC, however, says you're one 
Captured by Plamen T.
357
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementbig happy family, you have fixed expenses and you have variable 
expenses. Your variables are your materials and your fixed is every- 
thing else. And sitting around spending  all your time trying to figure 
out how much electricity and square  footage of air conditioning and 
cooling goes to the press room, how much to the bindery and the 
prepress and how much to the o ffice doesn't help you manage your 
business. 
DW: Because it distracts you from the goal.  
CM: Yes! Of meeting the needs of  the customer. And flowing the 
work in a timely fashion. When we began to concentrate on making 
the work flow, that is, maximizing the capacity of the press room, and 
subordinating everything else to that, we began to improve our on- 
time delivery. The critical issue is how you measure the performance 
of the organization. We use two methods. 
DW: And they are?  
CM: Eli Goldratt talks about developing a constraint management 
tool. Ours is called TCP, for throughput contribution per press hour. 
When the market isn't a constraint, you choose which products and 
which customers to bring in based on that number. That's how you 
build profitability. Assuming, of cour se, that the constraint is not in 
the market. 
DW: And when the constraint is in the market?  
CM: For that we came up with a nother internal measure. We call 
it CRH, for contribution margin per resource hour. We try only to 
capture hours that represent value that customers pay for. We take 
the contribution—which is sales less materials—and we divide by the 
hours consumed and come up with a relative measure that has validitv 
across the whole organization. It has taught us an immense amount 
about what we do here. 
DW: By confirming what you already suspected or by  
revealing what you hadn't known before?  
CM: Both. It confirms that certain ty pes of customers, certain types of 
Captured by Plamen T.
358
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementwork, are difficult and cost us more  to manufacture-it clearly pointed 
that out. And then it also began to show us how technology affects 
our margins. I mean, we get most of our books on PDF files now, 
and the cost difference between working with a PDF file and working 
with what I'll call the old conventional way is incredible. What was 
happening was that we were being forced by the market to reduce 
our prices across the board, but th en any job done the old way was 
not very profitable. Hah! Not profitable at all! People were expecting 
PDF pricing for conventional work, and that just doesn't work. Bot- 
tom line: In a harsh business climate,  in which the market is the new 
constraint, and sales are declining, we've actually built profitability. 
Significantly. 
D W :  D o e s  i t  h e l p  t h a t  y o u ' r e  a n  E S O P  c o m p a n y ?  D o e s  t h a t  
make 
it easier for employees to align their interests with the goal?  
CM: It depends on the individual . Someone who is ten years from 
retirement is more interested in the value of the stock. Someone who's 
been here three or four years, they' re looking at the individual-based 
bonus. So we actually began to implement team bonuses instead of 
individual-based bonuses. Today we 're working on disconnecting the 
link between compensation and perf ormance feedback. Feedback is 
going to be all team-based. 
DW: You said you had 300 employees before and now you're 
at 280. Is that the fault of a bad business climate or a benefit 
of being more efficient?  
CM: It's both. The business climate has not been healthy. But at 
the same time, some of the changes we made freed up capacity, and 
as people quit we didn't replace them, which built profitability. No 
layoffs. We just didn't replace everyone who left. And we moved 
individuals around. 
DW: Is the constraint still in the presses?  
CM: Well, it shifted to the bindery. 
DW: What about market constraints?  
Captured by Plamen T.
359
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementCM: Yeah, we have more capacity than the market's willing to give. 
That's an issue. I think we're prepared to meet the market when and 
if it comes back. And in order to do that we have to do three things. 
We have to fulfill the requirements of speed and delivery. We have 
to stay profitable to maintain ou r equipment and provide the quality 
that customers expect from us. And then, three, we have to have em- 
ployees who are participating fully, w ho want to come to work every 
day, and who understand why they're here and why they're doing 
what they're doing. TOC has a llowed us to do all three. 
 
 
Interview with Eli Goldratt continued. .. 
DW: I'm back to my previous question. How come most readers 
of The Goal do not rush to implement TOC?  
EG: TOC is built on the realization that every complex environment/ 
system is based on inherent simplic ity and the best way to manage, 
control and improve the system is by capitalizing on this inherent sim- 
plicity. That's why the constraints are the leverage points. That's why 
the five focusing steps are so powerful. But, what we have to bear in 
mind is that such an approach is a major paradigm shift. And people 
will do almost anything before they will shift their paradigm. 
From observation, I can tell you that readers of The Goal proceed to 
implement it mainly when three conditions are met. First, there is a real 
pressure to improve. But that by itself is far from being enough. The 
second condition is that it is obvio us to them that there is no remedy 
within their existing paradigm. In other words, they had already tried 
everything else. And the third condit ion is that something helped them 
to do the first step. This someth ing might be a "how to" book, like 
Production The TOC Way, a course, a simulator, or a consultant. 
DW: Can you guide me to a case where all the three condi- 
tions exist?  
EG: Frankly, once the three conditions had crystallized in my mind it 
became easy to detect them in every case. It is just a matter of asking 
the right questions and the pattern is apparent. Actually, there is no 
need even to ask guiding questions, you just have to listen. 
Captured by Plamen T.
360
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement 
 
Interview with Stewart Witt, Ongoing Improvement  
A consultant  
DW: I understand that your introduction to The Goal came be- 
fore you became a consultant  
SW: Right. I was VP of operations at the time for a small manufactur- 
ing company, Ohmart/Vega Company, in Cincinnati, Ohio. Someone 
gave me the book with the recommend ation to read it. And I read it, 
and it was very entertaining and ma de a lot of sense, and I promptly 
put it right back on the shelf. 
DW: I've heard stories like that before.  
SW: Right. I just wasn't ready yet. This company had hired me specifi- 
cally to improve their operations and prepare them for growth and 
make them more efficient, all that stuff. I had talked the president 
into hiring a consulting firm, sayi ng, "I can do these things but we 
can get it done that much quicker with some help," and he was fine 
with that. So we hired Grant Thornton, and they came in. We rear- 
ranged everything, streamlined ever ything. They took a look at the 
software we were using and made  some other recommendations. We 
paid them about $120,000 and in about 6-8 months we started to see 
some results. Everyone was very happy because we took lead times 
down from, like, two weeks to one w eek. It was, wow, that's pretty 
good! The problem was that the sa me improvements were happening 
in sales and marketing. So here co mes 40% more orders in the same 
time frame, and as it trickled out into the shop, so trickled away my 
improvements. The capacity I had freed up was now being doubled 
up by all these extra orders and I was back in the same boat that I 
was in before. 
DW: What were you manufacturing?  
SW: Nuclear measuring devices for the oil industry. Essentially, it's a 
non-contact measuring system, kind of like a Geiger counter. 
DW: So, you were back in the same boat  
 
Captured by Plamen T.
361
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementSW: Yeah, I spent all this money, a ll this time. All the things I knew 
how to do I had done. I couldn't rearrange everything again. I couldn't 
look at the software and come up with any new ideas. I had already 
employed the best consultants that I knew. 
DW: Right So what did you do?  
SW: I signed up for Porsche mechanic school in California. It must 
have been a weak moment in my lif e. I do amateur racing and there's 
a saying that goes: you didn't ma ke any mistake when you spun the 
car and flew off the track; what yo u did was you went into the corner 
and ran out of talent. That's how I l ooked at it-I must not be cut out 
for this job, there must be something I'm missing. I couldn't figure 
it out 
DW: How old were you?  
SW: That was ten years ago; so, early 30s. Mechanic school wasn't 
a waste of time. I still use what I le arned. I save 600 bucks doing my 
own tune-ups. But right before I left to go out there, someone said: 
"You know, in San Jose there's a so ftware company that has been cre- 
ated to support the rules that are stated in The Goal, and by the way, 
the Goldratt Institute has just issued  a self-learning kit that you might 
be interested in." So I went to my mechanic class, that was very fun. 
Then afterwards I stopped in San Jose, took a look at the software, 
and completed the workbook on the way home. I was so excited that 
on Monday morning I got my staff together and I said: "This is what 
we're going to do. We've got nothing to  lose. It looks like it's possible. 
It almost looks too simple. Let's give  it a try." They weren't very con- 
vinced. In fact they were pretty skeptical. I'd put them through a lot 
already. One more thing, huh? 
DW: This was their first exposure to TOC?  
SW: Yes. Short story is, it took us about a month to go through the 
training materials, which came with a tutor guide and a workbook for 
all the participants. I went through the tutor guide step by step, they 
went through the workbook, and eventu ally they said: "I think you're 
right, we can do this." So we st arted, and about two weeks later we 
began to see some things improve. Lead times were starting to come 
Captured by Plamen T.
362
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementdown, our on-time deliveries were star ting to go up. At first I thought 
it was just a fluke. 
DW: What changed your mind?  
SW: Well, a month later here comes one of my welders and he says: 
"Boss, I think my numbers are wrong . The lead time I've been mea- 
suring is now about a day and a hal f." I said: "How can that be?" We 
were still running more orders. I had  even had to fire a guy in the 
meantime, so we were down reso urces. And we hadn't bought any 
new equipment. So I said, "Okay, fine, let me check and I'll let you 
know what I find out." 
DW: What did you find when you examined the numbers?  
SW: I told my welder: "You know wh at? You're right, the numbers are 
wrong. The lead time is less than a day." Same resources, 40% more 
orders, a fraction of the lead time. Took us two months to do that. 
Cost us $500. The company was a hundred years old and they had the 
best two quarters that they've ever had. One division that was losing a 
million dollars a month was now making a million dollars a month. If 
I hadn't seen it with my own eyes, I would never have believed it. 
DW: What was the constraint you exploited to make such  
a huge difference?  
SW: We actually worked through about three of them. One of them 
had to do with the fact that we were sending everything out to put a 
protective coating on the pipes that held the measuring equipment. 
It was a step that had been adde d at some point by the marketing 
department, and it had developed into  a constraint. So we had to go 
and find one or two more suppliers to handle the load. 
DW: And there were others?  
SW: One was the saws that cut the pipes. We offloaded some of the 
work to another machine that was ju st sitting there doing nothing. That 
saw ran at half the speed of the other saw, no one ever wanted to use 
it. But we identified just the right materials to run on it, which built 
just enough capacity to eliminate th e saw as a constraint. And then the 
Captured by Plamen T.
363
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementpaint department was next, we did a couple of things there. At which 
point the constraint shifted to engi neering. We were waiting for some 
new products to come out, and th at's kind of where it ended up. 
DW: Do you believe that TOC is an infinite process? In other 
words, is there always going to be another constraint you can 
find and exploit? 
SW: Theoretically, it can go on foreve r .  B u t  f r o m  w h a t  I ' v e  s e e n ,  i t  
goes through one or two cycles within  a facility, and then you've kind 
of broken the constraint in the production operation. Then it may 
move to, say, engineering. Then you can apply Critical Chain to the 
engineering group and eliminate that as a constraint, and then the next 
constraint usually is the market, and typically it's the existing market. 
Unless you're Coke or GE or whoever, you probably don't have a 
dominant position in your market. So you can still find room to grow. 
Finally, there are plenty of cases where, using the same capabilities 
that you generated using TOC, you can attack new markets that you 
never thought you could compete in . At that point, you're probably 
doing all you can handle anyway. 
Or maybe it goes back to manufacturing again. Could be, yeah, and 
you definitely know how to deal with that by then. 
DW: Alright So then you moved on?  
SW: I actually went to Grant Thornton for two years and worked on 
developing other TOC skills and a pplying what I knew to an ERP 
[enterprise resource planning] impl ementation at a plant in Mexico, 
working with Navistar International . I did that for about two years. 
Traveled to Mexico a lot, gained about 40 pounds, got no exercise. 
But it was kind of fun. Then I went to work for a consulting firm. 
Within about a month I was put on my first project, involving TOC, 
at a manufacturing facility in Clarksville, Tennessee, where they made 
graphite electrodes for the steel industry. It was a big plant, had been 
there quite a while, and it was already their best plant of that kind in 
the world. They made it a challenge for us, saying, "If you can improve 
things here, then we'll consider applying your methods elsewhere." 
DW: This was a large-scale implementation?   
Captured by Plamen T.
364
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementSW: Huge. The plant covered half of Tennessee, it seemed like, way 
out in the middle of nowhere. So we  put a small team together. It 
was me and another guy and about half a dozen folks at the site, and 
we went through the exact same training I had done the first time at 
Ohmart/Vega. Was exactly the same concept, exactly the same ideas. 
The only thing different was the context. We ha d software systems we 
had to integrate—five different softwa re systems that had the data in it 
we needed. We identified the constraint, and did all the usual things, 
like making sure there was a buffer in front of it, making sure the 
maintenance guys were giving it top priority so if there's any trouble 
they could fix things right away. We put a quality check in front of it 
so that we weren't wasting time processing any bad electrodes at that 
point in the process. 
DW: What was the upshot?  
SW: No change whatsoever in on-t ime delivery. The company already 
had an excellent record in that regard and by the time we had fin- 
ished, it still had an excellent record. But the only reason they could 
deliver on time before was because they had more inventory than 
they really needed. They just stuffed the shelves full of electrodes, 
had them sitting all over the place. So you see, we didn't disrupt their 
delivery performance at all, they continued to deliver 100% on-time. 
But in the end they did it with about 40% less inventory. And they 
were very satisfied with that becaus e that essentially freed up almost 
$20 million that they could now use elsewhere to run their business. 
Based on those results, the CEO st ood up at a big meeting one day 
and said that this is what we're going to do worldwide. We brought 
representatives from Spain, Brazil, Italy and South Africa to Clarksville 
as part of a worldwide implementation team. It's become a classic case 
of phenomenal improvement and a very satisfied client. 
DW: So this is what you do now? TOC-based consulting gigs?  
SW: Yes. 
DW: Do you offer TOC as one option among many, or is  
this your primary approach to problem-solving?  
SW: Maybe there's a third way. If I'm invited to participate in some of 
Captured by Plamen T.
365
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementthe initial meetings with the client, I may approach it differently than 
some of my colleagues. They'll come in and say: "We have this line 
of services, which one do you want?" What I do is ask questions, like 
Jonah does in the book. That helps me  decide if there is a fit for what 
I do. Basically, I try to help clients understand that if you address the 
core problems rather than the symp toms so many people focus on, 
you can almost promise good results. 
 
 
Interview with Eli Goldratt continued...  
DW: What are the limits of TOC? Can it be applied also to 
service-based organizations?  
EG: Yes, but... And in our ca se the "but" is quite big. 
Let me start with the "Yes." Yes, any system is based on inherent 
simplicity, in this sense there is  no difference between a manufactur- 
ing organization and any other orga nization, including service orga- 
nizations. Yes, the way to capitalize on the inherent simplicity is by 
following the five focusing steps; identify the constraint, decide how 
to exploit it, etcetera. 
The "but" revolves around the fact that it might not be a triviality to 
figure out how to actually perform each  of the five steps; to figure out 
the detailed procedures. In The Goal, I introduced the overall concept 
and, through the detailed procedures for production, proved its valid- 
ity. In It's Not Luck, I've explained the thinking processes needed to 
develop the detailed procedures to perform each of the five steps. As 
teaching examples, I showed how th e thinking processes are used to 
develop the detailed procedures for sales of several different cases of 
manufacturing organizations. So, as  a result, manufacturing organi- 
zations are not presented only wi th the approach and the concepts 
but also with the detailed proced ures. Detailed procedures are not 
available for most types of service organizations. Therefore, in order 
to implement TOC in a service org anization, one has to follow this 
generic knowledge and first develop the specific procedures. This is, 
of course, a much bigger task. 
DW: So why didn't you write another book for service orga- 
nizations ? 
Captured by Plamen T.
366
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementEG: As you know, we use the term service organization for a very 
broad spectrum of totally different types of organizations. Organiza- 
tions that are different from each other no less than they are different 
from manufacturing. You are not ta lking about another book, you are 
talking more of a library. 
DW: Can you give me an exam ple of a TOC implementation 
in a service industry? Any type of service industry?  
EG: Let's start with a company that does not design or manufacture 
anything, and therefore is called a service organization. Still they 
deal with physical products; someth ing that you can touch. An office 
supply company. 
DW: A distributor of office supply products?  
EG: Correct. But before you go and interview them, let me stress one 
point. All the TOC detailed procedures  for the logistical aspects of 
distribution had long been developed and tested in many companies. 
But this particular company still had to use heavily the thinking pro- 
cesses to properly develop the detailed procedures needed to properly 
position itself in the market. 
 
 
Interview with Patrick Hoefsmit, Office Supply  
Former managing director, TIM Voor Kantoor, 100-year-old 
office supply company in the Netherlands . 
DW: What was your first exposure to The Goal?  
PH: I was one of the owners of a pr inting company. Pretty big com- 
pany. Couple of hundred people, 40 presses. I was taking a course 
from someone who was explaining to me the difference between debit 
and credit-I'm a technical engineer, so I needed some explanation. 
And I was such a pain in the ass duri ng the course that he gave me 
a book, The Goal. He said, "This is something for you because all 
the other books are nothing for you." I read it with great pleasure. 
I thought finally I have found some one who can explain to me the 
meaning of business.  
Captured by Plamen T.
367
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementDW: That seems to be a large part of the appeal of The Goal, 
it's accessibility.  
PH: Yes, The Goal doesn't go really deep into the financial difficulties 
of running a company. As a matter of fact it completely makes it ir- 
relevant. So for me it was also a great message that I could just ignore 
all these economist Ph.D. people-if th ey couldn't explain to me what 
was going on, then forget about it ! So that was my first experience 
with the Theory of Constraints. Th en somebody gave me an article 
that said Eli Goldratt was in Holland to give a seminar. So I went 
there. At the seminar Eli told us that he just increased the price for 
his Jonah courses from $10,000 to $20,000 because otherwise top 
management wouldn't come; something like that. So I said to him, "I 
promise I will come, even at the old price!" He said he had a better 
deal for me. If I was to do the course, I could do so and I only had 
to pay him after the results were of  such magnitude that the price of 
the course was irrelevant. 
DW: Good deal.  
PH: Yeah, it was a perfect deal. So I went to New Haven, to America. 
He had an institute there. Did the course, couldn't do anything with it. 
So a year later I went to ajonah upgr ade workshop; it was in Spain. Eli 
has a very good memory, so when he ran into me he said, "Hey, did 
you pay for your course yet?" I said , "No, no, I didn't see any reason 
why I should." So he invited me for a private session. Some people 
warned me about that! On Monday morning I had a private session 
here in Rotterdam. That was a hefty morning. All my homework 
and all the things I did were to hi m completely irrelevant. The point 
was, I was looking at my own company and looking for a production 
bottleneck when there was so much excess capacity and the constraint 
was obviously in the market! But for me that was thinking outside the 
box. It had never occurred to me that Theory of Constraints would 
apply also outside the company's walls. 
DW: That's understandable, since The Goal describes a produc- 
tion problem.  
PH: Yes. So I was one of those st upid people who couldn't see the 
whole picture. So then Eli explained the bigger picture and the bigger 
Captured by Plamen T.
368
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementapplication of it. He slowly forced me to think-sometimes by yelling 
at me, "Think!" It was a hefty mornin g. And this story is described by 
him in It's Not Luck—the candy wrappers case. We finally made some 
money over there. Actually, a lot of  money. Later I discovered that 
my nephew, who was the other 50 % owner of the company, wasn't 
doing much and was taking out more money than we had agreed 
upon, so we decided to split the company in two. I did the split and 
he chose which part he wanted. I never imagined that he would keep 
the printing business, which I had been running, and leave me with 
the office supply business, whic h had been his responsibility. 
DW: Did you know anything about the office supply?  
PH: No, nothing at all. The compan y was pretty big, it was number 
f o u r  o r  f i v e  i n  t h e  N e t h e r l a n d s .  I t  w a s  m a k i n g  a n  a w f u l  l o s s .  C o m -  
petition was suddenly fierce and only concentrated on price. Other 
companies were very subtly sending brochures to every small business 
in the Netherlands with prices on the front cover that I couldn't get 
for myself as a wholesaler. This was really awful. All our good custom- 
ers became suddenly more and more interested in price. They said, 
"How is it possible that we pay twice as much as what's on the front 
cover of this brochure?" 
DW: It sounds like an impossible situation . 
PH: Well, it was, it was really awful. We had something like four or 
five thousand customers, 20 sales people. The only thing we could 
think of was to also lower prices, and do it only on items where we 
had to. That was not a long-term solution but that was what every- 
body else was doing. So the conv entional way of doing business in 
office supplies was pretty soon comp letely gone. We got tenders for 
office supplies-which was unheard of—where you had to fight with 
three or four competitors. In the past, orders for office supplies were 
just given to a local good-perfo rming company. Now everybody was 
focusing on price. 
DW: So what did you do? 
PH: We started to build, as Eli calls it, the current reality tree. And 
of course this time I didn't make  the mistake of making it about our 
Captured by Plamen T.
369
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementcompany but I made it about the customers' situation: Why is this 
customer complaining so heavily abou t price? After long thought and 
a lot of discussions with my sales people, the only thing we could come 
up with is that he's thinking this is the only way that he can decrease 
the total cost of office supplies; that he can't do anything about the 
tremendous cost of having to stock supplies, and store them, and the 
cost of bringing the stuff to the right people in the building. Well, I 
know what kind of a mess customers can make out of it. In most of- 
fices where you open drawers, there' s more stock in the office than 
anybody can imagine. While at the same time they are screaming for 
a specific item which has to be brought to them by taxi in crazy short 
delivery times. In Rotterdam we are down to four-hour delivery times! 
Not even 24, just four-hour delivery times, which is completely crazy 
for office supplies. I mean, we're not saving lives here. 
So this is what we offered our cust omers: That we would take over all 
this hassle of supplying everybody in  the office with the right equip- 
ment, the right articles, at the right time. We offered them cabinets 
with office supplies in them. We owned both the cabinets and the 
contents. The supplies were for a specific working group. Whatever 
they took out was considered sold, wh atever was left was still ours. We 
replenished these cabinets every week. We made it very easy for them 
to check on us. And more important ly, we could give specific data 
about each department, explaining th at certain items were consumed 
fast. For instance you might need a ne w pair of scissors once in three 
months, but not every week. 
DW: So you could discover theft?  
PH: Well, we didn't call it theft, we called it overconsumption. But 
of course it was theft, yes. So su ddenly this guy who was responsible 
for office supplies had much better tools to go after his dishonest 
personnel. He's not interested in how many pencils someone uses. 
Everybody knows that people take pencils home; you do that by ac- 
cident and it doesn't cost anything. Toner cartridges, that's a bigger 
problem. So when the theft of these ink-jet cartridges went up very 
much, we advised them to buy bi gger printer machines, which we 
could also supply, to make them di fferent than the machines people 
had at home. Things like that. But those cabinets were a big, big 
invention. While our customers might have paid 20%-25% more for 
Captured by Plamen T.
370
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementthe actual articles, the total cost of providing office supplies for their 
workers dropped by 50% because they didn't have the internal hassle 
of misplacements, overstocking, and things like that. So they didn't 
care that much anymore about the original price we charged. When 
I sold my company a couple of yea rs ago, the due diligence took a 
long time because they couldn't believe our added value. 
DW: What were the numbers?  
PH: Normal gross margins in the industry were very much below 
20%. Above 20% was suspicious. We were above 30%, which makes 
a lot of difference. And we were not ripping people off. They were 
extremely satisfied with our service. 
DW: How did you go about selling the concept to your  
customers?  
PH: We had a department which was making appointments with 
financial directors, not the guy normally responsible for purchasing 
office supplies. That other guy was scared for his job when you came 
with this solution. And we made a short movie to show the current 
situation in their office and how people were screaming for office 
supplies and things like that, and ho w great it would be if we could 
take over their stock and their re sponsibility and solve this problem. 
And this worked really great. Some thing like 30% of the sales visits 
were successful sales. Again, the pr ices we were charging for supplies 
was no longer an issue 
DW: For anyone?  
PH: Not exactly. We still had some  customers who were focused on 
price. We didn't chase them away . We just gave them completely 
different conditions. We told them that if price is what matters most, 
you have to buy big quantities and you shouldn't care about delivery 
times: "You can get the lowest price possible but you have to stand in 
line." Now a good thing for us about the cabinet system was that we 
had one-week advance notice on our purchasing needs. I mean, what 
the customer used last week I didn 't bring the day I was checking. I 
would bring it the week later. So I hardly needed any stock anymore. 
My suppliers could deliver in a da y but I had a week. So now I could 
Captured by Plamen T.
371
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementstart buying on price. And I could combine my orders with those of 
the bigger customers who still wanted  to do business just on price. 
DW: Those must have been a very satisfying couple of years for 
you as you explored this new way of doing business.  
PH: Well, yes, for a couple of years it's really fun. Because you're 
winning a race. Of course at the be ginning I was relatively small; I 
was number four or five in the country. I was really afraid the bigger 
companies would copy my cabinet system. 
DW: Did they? 
PH: Yes, a little bit. But they didn't get the message. It was actually 
really funny. They were prepared to deliver cabinets but the customer 
had to buy the cabinet and the conten t as well. They were never willing 
to do it on consignment terms, whic h is what made it work. So that 
was a big difference to start with. Secondly, they didn't understand 
my replenishing system of stuffing the cabinets full enough that you 
could survive a couple of weeks. What they offered was so different 
that we could immediately show the customer that with our competi- 
tors, you'll still have to do it yourse lf, you'll have to take responsibility. 
Whereas in my case, when you chan ge a printer, for example, and 
you don't tell me, I will find out you don't use this cartridge any more 
and I'll adjust. These cartridges are very expensive, do you want the 
responsibility? That's the main  difference of consignment. 
DW: Later were you able to discover new constraints that 
opened the way to new growth?  
PH: Ultimately the constraint moved back inside the company. The 
new constraint became; how quickly can we measure or install a new 
cabinet? At first we could only do something like two or three cabi- 
nets a day. People were standing in line for cabinets. We had waiting 
lists for three months. So we put a second person on the job. Not a 
big deal. But we were fully in char ge. We could grow at the pace we 
wanted to grow. That's kind of funny in a race where everybody was 
yelling about price! There are other businesses in that situation. For 
example, if you go to a really good restaurant, they don't care about 
prices. They are booked for the next  three or four months; they be- 
Captured by Plamen T.
372
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementcome arrogant. And we had the same situation! It was great! And to 
think that we had started with all those competitors, all the problems, 
and 20 sales guys who were really discouraged, they didn't know what 
to do. And here we came with this really simple solution. I'm amazed 
that to this day nobody's really copying it. 
DW: Would you have discovered this breakthrough had you 
not been exposed to Goldratt's theories?  
PH: First of all, I wouldn't have known how to attack the problem 
Since I was working at the printing company and my nephew was 
working at the office supplies company, I never expected that we 
would 
change roles. Nevertheless, I knew how much loss they made. And by 
then I was so convinced that just by applying Theory of Constraints, 
I would figure out a way to solve the problem. It took me something 
like three or four weeks to see the light and understand what was go- 
ing on and how to solve it. I surviv ed that month by sitting back and 
saying, "Okay, no panic, no panic, let's not be hasty. As long as we 
don't have a breakthrough idea I'm not going to make any changes " 
I was just sitting back and thinki ng and discussing with people how 
we could solve the problem, until we solved it. And that's one of the 
good things about theory of constraints. You know in these cases that 
eventually you will come up with a breakthrough idea. 
DW: You have only to find it  
PH: Yes, and I became better and better at it. It takes Eli about five 
minutes to find the constraint and how to brake it. In most cases, I can 
f i n d  t h e  s a m e  w i t h i n  a  w e e k .  C o m p a r e  i t  t o  j u s t  d o i n g  m o r e  o f  
the'same. 
I very often use this funny story about two guys on a safari. And after 
a couple of days they hear the first tiger and they think, well, great! So 
they go for their guns and discover they forgot their bullets. So one of 
them puts his pack down and grabs his running shoes, and the other 
guy starts laughing: "Do you think you can outrun the tiger?" He says, 
'I don't need to outrun the tiger, I only have to outrun you!" 
Captured by Plamen T.
373
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement 
 
Interview with Eli Goldratt continued...  
DW: Can you give me another example? Of a service company 
that does not deal with physical products? 
EG: To demonstrate how different one type of service company is 
from another, I suggest you interview both a bank and a financial 
advisors company. Then interview another, obviously different, type 
of service industry, a hospital 
 
 
Interview with Richard Putz, A Midwest Bank 
Former CEO of Security Federal Bank. 
 
DW: How did you conceive of appl ying the principles outlined 
in The Goal to the banking industry? 
RP: I was flying back from Los Angeles one night. And I was re- 
membering my days as a consultant at Coopers & Lybrand, working 
with the folks who were handling the manufacturing engagements. 
That's where I was first exposed to The Goal. And I began to think that 
when you look at how a bank operates—for example, how it moves 
through the process of putting loans together—it's really no different 
than manufacturing. Why couldn't I use something that worked in 
manufacturing and apply it to a bank? The process is the same, we 
just give it different labels. So I started testing that out. 
DW: How did that go over with the staff? 
RP: In the beginning they were skep tical. I got all of the people who 
report directly to me into the bo ard room, we sat down, I passed out 
copies of The Goal, and I said: "Guys, we're going to come together ev- 
ery week on Friday. We'll have fun, we'll have food, the whole bit, but 
we're going to discuss how to translate The Goal into banking terms." 
I'm looking over there at my CFO, he has this constipated look on his 
face. I said, "Jim, is there somethin g wrong?" He says, "Yeah." I said 
"What?" He says, "There's no index in the back of the book. How do 
we find anything?" I said, "You read it, it's a novel." He eventually 
became our biggest advocate. Bu t he was totally skeptical. 
 
 
Captured by Plamen T.
374
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementDW: So how did you approach the problem?  
RP: Traditionally the tough issue within banking is how you manage 
all the regulatory constraints that you're faced with. Banks are just 
immersed in regulations. And if you actually tried to manage accord- 
ing to the regulatory measurements, your bank would fail. You bring 
that up to the regulators and they laugh. There's just this whole slew 
of things, some of which contradict themselves. Some of them were 
created when lawmakers added them onto banking legislation because 
they looked good, or else to fit a particular situation at the time. 
DW: You're talking about regulations that keep banks out of 
certain businesses?  
RP: Right, as well as those that mandate certain loan mixes, how you 
approach a market, that type of thing. 
DW: Preservation of asset ratios and so forth?  
RP: You got it. We took a slightly different approach. We decided we 
had to figure out what our real market constraint was. Using TOC, 
we found it had to do with servi ce levels and how we were solving 
problems for our customers, not with the specific products we were 
offering. So we ended up gearing the whole bank toward solving prob- 
lems for our customers. Part of the solution—the injection that broke 
the conflict—was the creation of personal banking for everybody, not 
just for wealthy people. Banks normally assume it's not worth spend- 
ing time with you if you have only $100,000 when they can spend 
that time with a guy who's got $10 million. We discovered that a guy 
who only has $ 100,000 isn't really going to spend a lot of time with 
you anyway; he's just not there very often. So we stopped worrying 
about that and began focusing on ho w to better manage our customer 
relationships across the board. Peopl e ended up coming to our bank- 
ers anytime they had a financial problem. If we couldn't solve it for 
them, then at least we could refer them to someone else, and we could 
give them good advice because we didn't have an ax to grind. All we 
asked is that they let us manage th eir cash flow. Most people gave us 
everything in that regard, plus all their loans. 
DW: You had a large mortgage business, too? 
 
Captured by Plamen T.
375
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementRP: Right. We had more than 300 correspondent banks, all over the 
country. National City and Bank of  America would sell us mortgages. 
What we discovered-also using TOC,  and this is how we expanded 
this business—is that most people wi th a loan viewed the bank that 
serviced the loan as their bank. So, whether Freddie Mac or Fannie 
Mae or PNC or any other investor actually owned the loan, we wanted 
to own the servicing asset. It was more valuable in terms of building 
customer relationships than the loan itself. 
Also, these days it's a lot easier, but it used to take forever to get a 
mortgage approved. That's because there are all these things you 
have to have in place—again, to sa tisfy the regulators. We looked at 
that and said, "Okay, what's the conflict here?" We built our conflict 
clouds, and we built a current reality tree, and we discovered there 
are only three things that end up deciding whether a loan is a go or 
a no-go. If we just focus on doing those three items, and worry about 
plugging everything else into the file later, we can speed things up. In 
fact we were able to cut the approval  time almost in half. That made 
us really popular with realtors and mortgage brokers, which brought 
us more business. 
DW: What effect did TOC have on customers' ordinary day-to- 
day interactions with tellers?  
RP: Most of the tellers said they wa nted to do this TOC thing, too. 
Well, what do they really need to do? They really don't need to know 
how to do future reality trees because their everyday life is not involved 
in future reality trees. But a teller is  often dealing with conflict resolu- 
tion. Tellers represent the frontline defense, especially at savings and 
loans. People come up to them and say: "This doesn't work, this is 
out of balance, they screwed this up," and it's the tellers who have to 
solve the problem. So we taught them how to do conflict clouds. We 
created conflict-cloud worksheets for them, pads of 50 sheets, eight 
and a half by eleven. On the back side were the instructions, just in 
case they forgot how to do it. And the teller could actually fill in the 
cloud as he or she was talking to the customer, work out the prob- 
lem, then rip off the sheet and do the next one. We had that going 
throughout the bank. 
DW: It sounds like one of the main conclusions you reached  
Captured by Plamen T.
376
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementwas that the perceived constraint-the regulatory climate-was 
not the actual constraint  
RP: Correct. I would walk into th e office of my compliance officer 
and I'd say, 'Jeff, I got this idea ." And he would just automatically 
point to this poster on his wall that  basically said: If you can dream 
it, there's a regulation for it. 
DW: And yet even in that environment, you found ways to 
grow. 
RP: We did things in the banking industry that were totally unheard 
of. We actually had regulators visi t us more often than other banks 
because those other banks kept callin g them and saying: "They've got 
to be doing something illegal, you need to check them out." 
 
 
Interview with David Harrison, Administrative Ser- 
vices, Founder, Positive Solutions, Newcastle, U.K.  
DW: Tell me about Positive Solutions.  
DH: We provide management and administrative services to inde- 
pendent financial advisors. At presen t we have 755 of those people 
who rely upon us to help them with such things as compliance with 
financial services regulations, coll ection of commissions, and so forth. 
That's the company we built, 60% of which we sold recently to the 
Aegon group, one of the world's largest insurers. 
DW: How have you made use of The Goal?  
DH: In a couple of ways. First and foremost we use the five focus- 
ing steps almost instinctively now, in  that we seek to identify the 
constraint in any problem before we do anything else. That's sort of 
been my mantra, if you like—before we go any farther, let's identify 
the constraint. 
Beyond that, a big part of what we do is acquire new independent 
financial advisors-we want people to  join our organization, and the 
people we use to recruit them we call our business consultants. Oded 
Captured by Plamen T.
377
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementRP: In a couple of ways. First and foremost we use the five focussing 
steps almost instinctively now, in th at we seek to identify the con- 
straint in any problem before we do anything else. That's sort of been 
my mantra, if you like—before we go any farther, let's identify the 
constraint. 
Beyond that, a big part of what we do is acquire new independent 
financial advisors—we want people to join our organization, and the 
people we use to recruit them we call our business consultants. Oded 
Cohen, of Goldratt UK, helped us build a process for that. He broke 
it down into very discrete steps and helped us program software which 
helps us track how each of our busi ness consultants is succeeding, or 
not. At any point in time they may have 150-200 people they're hav- 
ing conversations with about joinin g Positive Solutions. We've got 
them to think of each of those people as a project. That streamlined 
the process and also got our business consultants to think in a more 
logical fashion. 
DW: What distinguishes Theory of Constraints from other man- 
agement techniques you've looked at?  
RP: I think it can be very easily app lied in a simple process. As I have 
said, the one I use more than anything else is the five focussing steps. 
A lot of the problems which arise in business are about lacking focus. 
I guess if people were to describe Positive Solutions, it would be as a 
very focussed organization. We don't s eek to be all things to all people. 
We stick to what we know will be th e most profitable areas to us at 
any point in time. We've been working on the same constraint for 
five years. 
DW: And that is?  
RP: Our ability to recruit the right people at a pace which fits our 
business plan. The more people we have, the more profitable we 
become. A lot of companies by no w would have given up at about 
300 advisors, something of that nature. And they'd say the constraint 
is no longer recruiting people, what we should be doing is trying to 
improve the productivity of those people, or trying to get a better 
deal out of the manufacturers of financial products. But we've kept 
the focus on the fact that as long as the people that you are recruiting 
Captured by Plamen T.
378
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementare profitable, then why stop recruiting them? Just because it's not 
getting any easier? Well, it's not ac tually getting any harder, either. 
It's just another day at the office. But we can work all of our financials 
back to simply the number of advisors that we have. Therefore, we 
don't go any farther. 
DW: That's your focus?  
RP: That's our focus. We've identified the constraint, now let's ex- 
ploit it, make the most of it. Therefore we have easily one of the best 
recruiting machines in the UK in this sector. We approach recruit- 
ment very differently from all our competitors. Our competitors will 
advertise, they'll try to acquire busi nesses, for example, rather than 
the approach that we have, which is to recruit people one by one. 
Our rate of growth might at first appear to be slow. But because our 
advisors have been recruited in the right way, we don't lose many of 
them. That's the beauty of TOC: As you really dig in to identify the 
constraints, you begin to understand these things. 
DW: Have you thought about what the next constraint will be?  
RP: Of course, at present there is still a market for further indepen- 
dent financial advisors to join us. There are about 25,000 of these 
people in the UK and we have less th an 1000 of them. Now the qual- 
ity of some of those 25,000, and th e fact that not everybody will join 
us in any case, means at some point the effort needed to increase the 
capacity just won't be worth it versus the energy we could put into 
something else. At that point, you say, "We've now changed our plan. 
What is the constraint in our new plan?" Frankly, it's about retaining 
the clients' money. At present what  we do is introduce clients to a 
variety of manufacturers of financia l services. The money goes to the 
manufacturers and they give some of  i t  b a c k  t o  u s  i n  t h e  f o r m  o f  
commissions or fees. The next step really is for the clients to give us 
the mone y, and  for  us then t o give some of  it t o the  fund manage rs 
and the life insurers. So once we're a certain size, the constraint will 
begin to move. We'll have a brand, and the revenue needed to com- 
municate that brand, so there won't be quite as much effort to get 
people to join us. At that point the constraint shifts.  
Captured by Plamen T.
379
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement 
 
Interview with Dr. Antoine Van Gelder 
A South African Hospital  
University of Pretoria  
DW: You're not a typical Eli Goldratt disciple, are you?  
AV: I'm a university professor with a dual appointment, head of the 
department of internal medicine at the University of Pretoria and 
head of the department of internal medicine at Pretoria Academic 
Hospital. In 1992 I got an invitati on to attend one of Eli Goldratt's 
courses in Pretoria. Not one run by him himself but by a subsidiary of 
the Goldratt Institute. At that time I knew nothing about theory of 
constraints and I had not read The Goal. I got myself into this out of 
curiosity more than anything else. 
DW: Why? What kind of help were you looking for?  
AV: Let me put it this way. I was liter ally sitting in my office, with mv 
head in my hands, highly frustrat ed, with piles of paper all around 
me, going through correspondence. I opened a letter, saw that it was 
another invitation to a course, threw it away, and as I threw it in mv 
wastepaper basket my eye caught the price of this particular course. 
It was the South African equivalent of about $18,000. That caught mv 
attention. I thought if any course was worth that amount it was worth 
looking at. This was a two week course in production management, 
the invitation was addressed to the engineering faculty. It had gotten 
to the medical faculty by mistake. The course was actually offered 
free to university professors. So be cause of my deep frustration with 
some of the management issues I had in my department, and because 
I had some time off the next week, I phoned. I planned to only go for 
the first week, because this was the time I had available. I was told 
that I had to attend the full two-w eek course. I said, "Yeah, we'll see 
about that." 
DW: But you went?  
AV: I went the first week. The course  was taught with reference to a 
production environment and the logic around it. Now you don't find 
much of this logic-the reality tr ees and that sort of thing-in The Goal. 
 
Captured by Plamen T.
380
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementQuite a lot of that is in It's Not Luck, which was published later. But 
the logic grabbed me because I was this frustrated man who was run- 
ning a department of medicine and I had not been trained to do that. 
I had no insight into management issues. Suddenly I saw that here 
was a potential way of analyzing my department. 
DW: What were the parallels?  
AV: My department was in chaos, total chaos. Everything coming 
and going, not knowing what was what—much as things were in the 
factory that is the setting of The Goal. During the course, The Goalwas 
mentioned. I bought it, read it through in one night, and I thought to 
myself, that's my environment. A chaotic system is not necessarily a 
factory. It could be a hospital with people coming and going. It could 
be a department with a whole lot of prima donnas-the doctors—that 
need to be managed. Th at parallel struck me. 
Now if I can answer your question a bit more precisely. When one is 
introduced to theory of constraints, the first thing you see is a system 
where the causality is hidden. In ot her words, it's chaotic. Things 
happen, you have no control. Suddenly, though, it becomes a system 
that can be analyzed in terms of certain key points—leverage points. 
And one learns that addressing these key points—rather than launch- 
ing a symptomatic firefight—is the way to exert control over these 
systems. Remember, this was in the early 1990s, before frameworks 
like systems theory had moved to the forefront and become part of 
the main buzz. Though the theory of constraints doesn't talk about 
systems theory, already it was offering an approach by which a com- 
plex system could be managed in terms of a few key leverage points. 
DW: Did you wind up attending both weeks of the course?  
AV: Correct. Then I came back to th e hospital. There are two points 
I want to make. The first was that I underwent a mental change. In- 
stead of thinking that things were too complicated, too complex and 
not manageable, I now saw that if I could analyze the system cor- 
rectly, it was manageable. That was the fi rst important breakthrough 
that I had, and many people I've taught this to subsequently have 
had the same breakthrough. There is a way-find it!  
Captured by Plamen T.
381
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementSecond, our outpatient clinic, like most hospital outpatient clinics at 
that time, and even now in many pa rts of the world, was plagued by 
inefficiencies and long waiting lists. The more we fought the ineffi- 
ciencies, the more money we poured into the system, the longer the 
waiting lists seemed to become. This  is the problem with the national 
health system in Britain as we speak. Now in my department, it seemed 
to me as though the processing of patients by doctors could really be 
viewed as a production line, just as in The Goal. The times are differ- 
ent, and obviously people aren't machines. All of those issues I ac- 
knowledged. But I saw that parallel. 
DW: How did you attack the problem?  
A V :  T h e  m a n a g e r  i n  c h a r g e  o f  t h a t  clinic and I sat down and I told 
her about the principles used in The Goal Between the two of us-with 
her doing most of the work—we identi fied our constraint. We realized 
that we lost a tremendous amount of capacity whenever patients or 
doctors wouldn't show up for schedu led appointments. That time lost 
was not recoverable. So we devel oped a call-in list, which we called 
the patient buffer. A day or two before a scheduled appointment we 
would phone patients and make sure that they would be coming into 
the clinic. If not, we would find subs titute patients. The result was less 
loss of capacity. Our waiting list at that time was about eight or nine 
months long, which is common for this type of waiting list. As a mat- 
ter of fact in the UK now some of these waiting lists are over one year. 
In about a six month period we got our waiting list below four months, 
which was roughly half of what most  other hospitals were doing in 
South Africa at that time. 
DW: Yours is a public hospital?  
AV: Yes, we're part of the state health system. In other words, not for 
profit. Patients pay only a small amount for services. Later on, after I 
started consulting with the Goldra tt Institute in South Africa, we 
looked 
at a large private hospital, 600 beds , a flagship hospital with neuro- 
surgery and all the high-tech stuff. The issue there was loss of capac- 
ity in the operating rooms. The spin -off effect of that was that sur- 
geons were leaving the hospital and going to other private hospitals. 
It was a serious situation. We found that instead of focussing on local 
optima—making sure that my little department comes first—the real 
Captured by Plamen T.
382
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementquestion people should be asking is , what can I do to achieve the 
larger goal of the hospital, which is to throughput new patients? It's a 
simple concept but implementing it  took about two months of meet- 
ing with staff. Each person then developed an action plan aimed at 
making sure more patients moved through the system more efficiently. 
In a period of a year, this hospit al moved from a 20% shortfall on its 
budget to where it began showing a profit. 
DW: So you've become a Goldratt consultant yourself?  
AV: Yes. I presented the results from our hospital's outpatient clinic 
at one of the Goldratt symposia in the early 1990s. This was the first 
report of a medical implementation of  the theory of constraints. Eli 
Goldratt was there to hear my presentation, and afterwards he in- 
vited me to join the Goldratt Instit ute as an academic associate. I was 
based at the university but involved in the implementations of his 
consulting company. I did quite a bit of work in the mining industry- 
nothing to do with medicine! It was pure theory of constraints, straight 
out of the book. It allowed me  to develop my own skills. 
DW: What's a doctor doing advising mining companies?  
AV: It's interesting that you say th at. I'm a physician, not a surgeon, 
In other words I'm a thinker, not a doer. I say that facetiously but as 
a physician, it's all about diagnosis. And the whole process of diagno- 
sis, whether it's a patient or an or ganization, is the application of the 
scientific method. Eli Goldratt says that his theory of constraints is 
simply the application of the scientif ic method. So it's almost natural 
that an advisor to a mining company—in terms of diagnosing what's 
wrong and what to do about it-could be a physician. In fact some of 
the teaching materials that the Goldratt Institute uses refer to the 
medical model. It asks trainee c onsultants, How does a doctor ap- 
proach the problem? It gives them a parallel for how you diagnose 
problems in organizations. 
DW: That's interesting. Eli has said that his overriding  
ambition in life is to teach the world how to think.  
A V :  R i g h t .  A n d  n o t h i n g  h e  h a s  d o n e  i n  t h e  a l m o s t  1 4  y e a r s  t h a t  I  
have known him suggests to me that that is a facetious statement. The 
Captured by Plamen T.
383
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementtheory of constraints is about thinking processes, it's a subset of logic. 
In other words, the scientific method. 
DW: Has any of this made you a better teacher of physicians?  
AV: Absolutely. Absolutely. I've told you that diagnosing a patient 
and diagnosing a business is the same thing. But a doctor learns to 
diagnose by watching other doctors. It's not taught as a science. The 
processes of diagnosis are taught but what might be called the phi- 
losophy of diagnosis is not taught as it is in the theory of constraints. 
The traditional approach is, watch wh at I do. The approach that I've 
since followed is, let's look at how the scientific method works, then 
let's see if we can apply this to a patient. Most students take to this 
very well. 
 
 
Interview with Eli Goldratt continued... 
DW: That will do it  
EG: Please, one more. The jewel in the crown, at least in my eyes, is 
the usage of TOC in education. Yes, in kindergartens and elementary 
schools. Don't you agree that there is no need to wait until we are 
adults to learn how to effectively insert some common sense into our 
surrounding? 
 
 
Interview with Kathy Suerken, CEO 
TOC For Education, 
An international nonprofit dedicated to teaching TOC think- 
ing processes to schoolchildren.  
 
DW: You're a middle school teacher, not a plant manager. How 
does The Goal fit with the work you do with children?  
KS: Well, it all started almost 15 years ago. I was kind of a new teacher 
at a middle school but I had been a parent volunteer for a while. I 
was running a voluntary math prog ram for kids and my husband was 
giving me advice on how to manage it. The program was already a 
success, we had 100% participation. I asked him, "Well, what do I do 
Captured by Plamen T.
384
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementnow? Go to a different school?" And he said, "Kathy, you'll have to 
find another goal." Six months later he said, "There's a book you 
have to read, we're passing it ar ound at our office and everyone's 
signing the back if they recommend it ." That was my introduction to 
The Goal. Within six months, I wrote a le tter to Eli Goldratt that be- 
gan, "Dear Dr. Goldratt, if you were to walk into the office of Frank 
Fuller, Ruckle Middle School's principal, on his desk you would find 
a copy of The Goal.. . and thereby hangs a tale."  I went on to say how 
I was using the ideas and concepts to run this project. 
DW: Did you hear back from Eli?  
KS: Within four days, with a copy of his newly revised book. And 
then within about a week or so I heard from Bob Fox, who was presi- 
dent of the Goldratt Institute at that  time, and they offered to send me 
to Jonah school on scholarship. So I went through the course. Later I 
went through a facilitator program on how to become a trainer of 
Jonah processes. And then I went back and taught a pilot course to 
kids. By the end of the year my ki ds were using the thinking pro- 
cesses, which they learned brilliantly. They were the most Socratic 
learners and teachers of other kids that you ever saw. It was pretty 
convincing evidence to me that this stuff works with kids, and it 
launched me into the role I have now. 
DW: Was it a course about TOC or a course that used TOC 
methods to teach other content?  
KS: It was a class on world cultures —basically a class on perspectives, 
which of course this is so alig ned with. We used methods derived 
from TOC to advance the curriculum. Later I taught a critical think- 
ing skills course that was pure TOC.  In that course I was teaching 
cause and effect as a skill. We used  concepts like the conflict cloud to 
analyze conflicts in real-life situations. 
DW: What evidence do you have that the kids were absorbing 
the concepts?  
KS: Here's an example. One day I read to the students the section 
about the hike from The Goal, and then I gave th em an evaluation 
sheet. I asked them, "How is this re levant to real life? What's the 
Captured by Plamen T.
385
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementweakest link?" Stuff like that. It wasn't  a test. I just wanted to know if 
they were getting it. That night I looked at their answers and I real- 
ized maybe half of them got it and ha lf of them didn't. So I went back 
the next day and I asked them again, "What determines the strength 
of the chain?" I called on one boy—let's say his name was Mike-who 
I knew was struggling. He was rambling on and on. He did not get it. 
And I did not know what to ask Mike to get the answer out of him. So 
then I looked at my other students. And I knew if I called on John, for 
example, who did get it, he would just tell Mike the answer, and that's 
not what I wanted. So I said, "No one can give Mike the answer. You 
can ask Mike a question to help him think of the answer." And that is 
when one of my other students raised her hand. She said, "Remem- 
ber when we were doing the cloud on teach fast, teach slow? The 
problem of making sure everyone understands but the fast ones don't 
get bored?" That's when I saw what was happening. As the other 
students began asking Mike questi ons designed to draw the answer 
out of him, I could see that every one was engaged. It was a wonderful 
example of cooperative learning. Beca use everyone had to think. Even 
if they already knew the answer, they were thinking hard about how 
to guide others to the answer. 
DW: How do you introduce TOC to schools where it has never 
been taught before?  
KS: We usually start with teaching  TOC as a generic process, then 
figure out how to apply it to a sp ecific curriculum. Initially it was 
easier to get it in through the counseling element of the school-the 
behavior application. That seemed to be the most obvious way in. 
DW: How do counselors use TOC?  
KS: Let's say the child is sent in to the guidance office with a behav- 
ioral problem. The counselor who's been trained in TOC will use 
tools like the negative and positive branch: "What did you do? Why 
were you sent here?" And then they go into the cause and effect con- 
sequences of the behavior, and how that leads to negatives for the 
student. The student will say, "If I do this, I get in trouble, I get 
grounded, I get sent up here, my parents get called." It's almost pre- 
dictable, this branch. Then the counselor asks, "Okay, what would 
happen if you didn't do these thin gs?" Then the student writes the 
Captured by Plamen T.
386
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementother branch, the positive one. Then  the counselor asks, "Okay, which 
would you prefer? It's up to you." 
One of the first teachers that was us ing this in a classroom in Califor- 
nia was working with at-risk students. They were at risk of failing 
academically and behaviorally. She was teaching the process outright, 
as a skill. And she had her students  do cause and effect branches. 
One boy did it on, "I'm going to steal a car, go on a joy ride." She 
went to help him, because he coul dn't get the branch started. "She 
said, "What's the problem?" He said, "This is the first time I've ever 
thought of something ahead of time." In the end he had to go to the 
driver education teacher and get some  information to finish the branch, 
which is great. He found out what would happen to him if he got 
caught, because he didn't really know. How do you quantify the re- 
sults of something like that? 
DW: You've since developed other applications?  
KS: Yes, and they're interconnected. Because behavior changes atti- 
tudes. Or maybe I should say that attitudes impact behavior. If a stu- 
dent can make a more responsible decision, and he gets a favorable 
impact, his attitude toward the teacher and what he's doing in school 
changes. That's bound to have some impact on his learning. But ad- 
ditionally, we have, in the past two years, really worked on how to 
deliver the TOC learning process through curriculum content. Or, 
again, maybe it's the other way around: How to teach content using 
the TOC processes. Because teachers do not want to interrupt class to 
teach a life skill. They have to teach the curriculum. 
DW: I understand you've introduced TOC to young people in 
prison settings.  
KS: I went into a juvenile jail in California about five years ago. I 
spoke to a new group of juvenile of fenders, this was their first day. 
They were all gang members. Later the teacher who invited me told 
me he had been very worried becaus e I was female and most of them 
had been abused by their moms. He was afraid they would back me 
into a corner and be quite rude. There I stood there in a polka dot 
dress, from Niceville, Florida, looking like the person who had put 
them in jail. I'm sure I didn't look very empathetic. But I tried to get 
Captured by Plamen T.
387
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvementthem to tell me what they wanted out of life. They said things like. 
"We just want to get out of here, lady." I said, "Do you think that's 
enough to keep you out of here?" 
Finally, one boy said to me, "I just want a better life for my kids." 
These were 16 to 19-year-old old black and Hispanic males. I looked 
at this guy and I said, "I'm sorry I don't understand, what do you 
mean? You have kids?" He said, "Yes, I have a two-year-old and a 
baby." 
Anyway we had this goal on this rickety old chalkboard, "A better 
life." I said, "Okay, what is preventing you from having a better life?" 
They said, 'Jealous people." I turned  around and I said again, "I'm 
sorry, I don't understand what you mean by jealous." Because I'm 
thinking to myself, and not facetious ly, "who could be jealous of them, 
they're in jail?" And that's when they said, "Oh, but if you go back 
and try to get out of the gang they'll be jealous, they don't want you 
to leave the gang, you can't leave," and all this. 
They also mentioned prejudice as an obstacle. And as I'm making 
this list I am thinking, "I am in over my head." There was nothing I 
could think of that would overcome  the obstacles these kids were 
facing. But I didn't need to wo rry about it. Because they had the 
answer. They went down the list and they added more obstacles 
like, "my past," and "criticism," and about halfway through they 
gave me something brilliant: "Me. Myself. I have to change my- 
self. Right away." 
I later received letters from some of those kids. One of them said, 
"Before we had that talk, even making it to 21 was hard to see in my 
future. But you gave me hope." No w I ask you, did I give him the 
hope? No! It came from him! But he wrote, "You gave me hope that 
I can make it if I just follow those steps." That last part is so impor- 
tant. This is not just wishful thinking. It's giving somebody a process 
they can use, so that when the person who's giving them the attaboys 
isn't there, they have the know-why, not just the know-how to keep 
going. 
DW: Does TOC have the same relevance to kids who don't 
have such severe obstacles to overcome?   
Captured by Plamen T.
388
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing ImprovementAbsolutely. What it helps people do is to make sense of things. Many 
times, even in affluent communitie s, students are motivated only be- 
cause their parents want them to ac hieve. But learning does not make 
sense to them. It doesn't seem relevant. They're doing it only be- 
cause they have all the right envir onmental factors. What could be 
unleashed from those children if we could present information to them 
in such a way that they could derive their own answers instead of 
providing answers that were simply memorized? It's all about un- 
leashing people's potential. I have felt many times as a teacher that 
disruptive behavior comes from the high achievers as well as the low 
achievers-because the high achievers are bored! In TOC we have a 
way to differentiate instruction with one learning process. To bring 
them all with you. 
DW: What is your goal for TOC For Education?  
KS: I see empowered learners, enabled learners, and the real joy of 
lifelong discovery. All those platitudes that we aspire to, I see them 
being practically achieved. As well as people being kinder to each 
other. I see this as the real language of civility. Once I had to give a 
presentation about TOC to a group of teachers. We put on a play 
with some of my students. And afterwards the students were saying, 
"Mrs. Suerken, what's going to happen? This is so effective, there 
won't be any problems left." I thou ght, that will probably never hap- 
pen! But that's the way they saw it. I wish you could come to our 
conference in Serbia in May! We'r e going into Thailand this month 
through an organization called the Girl's Brigade, like the Girl Scouts. 
We have somebody in Singapore that's taking it into the sports coun- 
cil, into sports applications. We'r e in Malaysia. My new director in 
the United States, he's going to start a private school next fall and 
he's writing all of the curriculum based on TOC. Really, I think we've 
just touched the tip of the iceberg.  
Captured by Plamen T.
389
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For information about other books on the 
Theory of Constraints (TOC) 
please visit our web site at: 
www.northriverpress.com 
 
 
Captured by Plamen T.
390
E.M. Goldratt
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement