The Social
Entrepreneur’s 
Playbook  
Pressure Test, Plan,
Launch and Scale Your Enterprise
Expanded Edition
Ian C. MacMillan 
James D. Thompson
PhiladelphiaPraise for The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook:
Pressure Test Your Start-Up Idea—Step One
“Social entrepreneurship represents an innovative and effective mechanism 
for addressing many problems around the world. The Social Entrepreneur’s 
Playbook  is an important contribution to help aspiring entrepreneurs take the 
first step. ”
— David Bornstein, author of How to Change the World:  
Social Entrepreneurs and the Power of New Ideas and coauthor  
of Social Entrepreneurship: What Everyone Needs to Know
“The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook  provides invaluable insights into how best 
to foster truly sustainable enterprises that are economically viable and that 
significantly improve quality of life for individuals and communities. ” 
— Kenneth C. Frazier, chairman of the board, president,  
and CEO, Merck & Co., Inc.  
“The processes recommended in The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook  show that 
due diligence matters, and can be carried out, for organizations that attend 
to those in need. That way, resources can be focused, and well-meaning but 
vainglorious resource expenditures avoided. What’s more: MacMillan and 
Thompson clearly walk their talk; rather than simply publishing a book, they 
are pressure-testing their own first draft and asking readers to help write the 
final manuscript. ”
—Mark O. Winkelman, senior director, Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.
“The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook  shows us how to understand, evaluate, and 
pragmatically fund investments designed for significant social impact. It is 
essential reading for those who care about deploying philanthropic and impact 
investing resources for the greatest good. ”
— Ronald D. Cordes, board member, ImpactAssets, and co-chairman, 
Genworth Financial, Inc.
“I have long felt that we can do better by using our altruistic resources to build 
self-sufficiency instead of dependency. The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook  shows 
that it can be done and how to do it. ”
—Robert B. Goergen, chairman and CEO, Blyth, Inc.
“MacMillan and Thompson have delivered a powerful set of tools for anyone 
interested in creating scalable, positive social impact while conserving resources 
through disciplined entrepreneurship. The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook  pro-
vides a unique and compelling framework for funders, investors, and others 
who would like to increase the reach, efficacy, and investment transparency of 
their contributions. ”
— Arthur D. Collins Jr., retired chairman and CEO of Medtronic, Inc.,  
and senior advisor to Oak Hill Capital Partners© 2013 by Ian C. MacMillan and James D. Thompson
Published by Wharton School Press
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
2000 Steinberg Hall-Dietrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104
Email: whartonschoolpress@wharton.upenn.edu
Website: wsp.wharton.upenn.edu
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, in any form
or by any means, without written permission of the publisher. Company
and product names mentioned herein are the trademarks or registered 
trademarks of their respective owners.
Ebook ISBN: 978-1-61363-030-3
Paperback ISBN: 978-1-61363-032-7
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2Our deepest thanks to the Wharton alumni who have 
sponsored this program, including the Ambani, Collins, 
Durrett, Gruber, Holekamp, Hurst, Meyer, Poole, Rosenstein, Snider, 
and Trone families for their interest, commitment, and willingness 
to support work in a space so fraught with uncertainty.
This book would not have been possible without the concerted 
efforts of many social entrepreneurs. In particular, we owe a 
debt of gratitude to Ilona for her tenacity, candor, and 
commitment to working with us over such an extended 
period of time. Alicia Polak made key contributions to 
the elaborations of frameworks within the manuscript.
Thanks also to Marc Gruber of the College of Management 
of Technology at École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne 
for his support in this research.Please visit
wsp.wharton.upenn.edu/book/social-entrepreneurs-playbook
to download forms to help you with
your project assessment and planning.The Social
Entrepreneur’s PlaybookContents
viiA Personal Note   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ix
Introduction: The Creation of Social Wealth Out of Poverty   . . . . . . xi
Phase One. From Possible to Plausible: 
Pressure Test Your Start-Up Idea
Chapter 1 .   Articulate Y our Targeted Problem and 
 Substantiate Y our Proposed Solution   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Chapter 2 .  Specify Performance Criteria   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Chapter 3 .  Define and Segment Y our Target Population   . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Chapter 4 .  Understand the Beneficiary Experience   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
Chapter 5 .  Analyze the Most Competitive Alternative   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
Chapter 6 .  Identify Operations Realities   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
Chapter 7 .  Address the Inevitable Sociopolitics   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
Chapter 8 .  Develop a Concept Statement   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
Phase Two. From Plausible to Probable: 
Plan Your Social Enterprise
Chapter 9 .  Frame and Scope the Venture   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
Chapter 10 .  Specify Deliverables   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
Chapter 11 .  Establish Assumptions and Checkpoints   . . . . . . . . . . . . 123viii     Contents
Phase Three. From Probable to Plannable: 
Launch and Scale Your Social Enterprise
Chapter 12 .  Launch Y our Enterprise   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 143
Chapter 13 .  Manage the Upside and Downside   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 157
Chapter 14 .  Scale Up Y our Social Enterprise   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 173
Conclusion   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 195
Acknowledgments   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 197
The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook Advisory Group   . . . . . . . . . . . . 199
Notes   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 203
About the Authors   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 211ixA Personal Note
On June 18, 2013, Wharton Digital Press (later renamed Wharton 
School Press) published The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook: 
Pressure Test Your Start-Up Idea—Step 1 . We provided the ebook for 
free to more than 10,000 active and aspiring social entrepreneurs as 
part of what publishing industry blog ThinReads  called “one of the 
more unusual ebook ... experiments of the year. ”
 We used our own start-up-to-scale-up method to publish The 
Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook  because the book is itself a social 
enterprise: it seeks to generate modest, self-sustaining revenues from 
book sales while helping social entrepreneurs start up their ventures 
with less risk and a greater likelihood of success while helping others. 
The free ebook introduced readers to the first phase of testing a 
social enterprise start-up idea: defining the social problem and 
articulating the revenue-generating solution, developing a qualified 
advisory group, defining and segmenting a seed target population, 
identifying the most competitive alternative, and addressing the 
operating realties.
 We invited readers of the free ebook to join the Social 
Entrepreneur’s Playbook Advisory Group by taking a survey. This 
crowdsourced feedback helped shape the complete edition of the 
book, which you now have in your hands or on your screen: The 
Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook: Pressure Test, Plan, Launch, and Scale 
Your Social Enterprise—Expanded Edition .
 Nearly 300 readers joined the Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook 
Advisory Group, many of whom are aspiring and active social x     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
entrepreneurs and philanthropists. Their ranks include founders, 
CEOs, executive directors, managing directors, and other leading 
social entrepreneurs and supporters. Members hail from for-profits 
and nonprofits and from all around the world. For a list of the 
advisory group members, see the Acknowledgments.  
 In addition to providing feedback on the free book, members of 
the advisory group shared where they were in the start-up process, 
what their biggest challenges were, and what they needed to know to 
be successful. The expanded edition you are now reading covers the 
issues that the advisory group told us are important. It includes the 
complete three-phase method for successfully testing, planning, and 
launching and scaling a social enterprise. 
 If you have read the free ebook, you will still want to start at 
the beginning of this book. Phase one has been expanded to include 
advice on setting revenue and social impact goals, how to navigate the 
inevitable sociopolitics, how to develop a strong concept statement, 
and more. 
 We wrote this book to share what we have learned over the 
past 12 years while working with social entrepreneurs. We want to 
broaden the impact beyond those we work with directly by assisting 
anyone devoting resources to helping the less fortunate, wherever 
that might be, in making a positive social impact and generating an 
income while doing so. 
 Thank you for reading this book. We wish you all the best with 
your social enterprise.
 For updates, downloadable forms, and additional information 
for nonprofits, please visit wsp.wharton.upenn.edu/book/social-
entrepreneurs-playbook. Introduction 
The Creation of Social Wealth
Out of Poverty  
xi“If you don’t know for sure what will happen, 
but you know the odds, that’s risk. …
If you don’t even know the odds, that’s uncertainty. ” 
—Frank Knight1 
In 2000, Ilona’s social enterprise was launched in northwestern 
Zambia, a region that was suffering widespread unemployment 
precipitated by a collapse of copper prices followed by the closing 
of Zambian copper mines, which in turn had led to widespread 
malnutrition.2 Her idea was to find ways to reduce the price of animal 
feeds (heretofore affordable only to larger-scale chicken producers), 
thereby creating a whole new market (small-scale chicken farmers), 
enriching the local economy (by creating new jobs), and reducing 
malnutrition (small-scale chicken farmers would keep some of the 
chickens for their families while selling the bulk at local markets), 
all the while building her own business (as small-scale chicken 
farmers succeeded, they would continue to buy chicken feed from 
her company).
  She began Zambia Feeds in a shed, with six men mixing feed by 
hand on a concrete floor. The company produced just enough feed 
per month for her first few customers. Six years later she stood on a 
mezzanine platform in her new warehouse and threw a switch at a 
ceremony to inaugurate newly commissioned equipment that would xii     Introduction
mix, pelletize, and pack nearly 2,000 tons of chicken feed per month, 
which was destined to be sold to a growing group of self-employed 
farmers, who would then sell their chickens at local markets. Now 
her business was serving 1,600 independent farmers, many of whom 
had sprung from the ranks of the unemployed, and who were now 
employing one or more workers themselves. The feed Ilona was selling 
would translate into approximately 40 million daily protein portions 
per year of chicken meat from chickens reared by these farmers. This 
number would eventually grow to 70 million daily protein portions 
per year. Ilona launched an enterprise that helps thousands of people, 
creating nutrition and employment through self-sufficiency, while at 
the same time generating tidy but not excessive profits through the 
phenomenon of social entrepreneurship. 
  Social entrepreneurship has rapidly become a mainstream 
topic and field of interest spanning the boundaries of academia, 
entrepreneurship, nonprofits, and the economic development 
sector. Organizations worldwide are testing new approaches to 
attempt to alleviate poverty and other social problems (whether in 
emerging economies or in often large pockets of poverty embedded 
in advanced economies). These organizations—be they nonprofits 
(increasingly under financial strain), for-profits (looking to combine 
corporate social responsibility with growth possibilities in bottom-
of-the-pyramid environments), or public-private partnerships—have 
begun launching revenue-generating enterprises to carry out their 
social missions. These “social entrepreneurs, ” as they are generally 
called, have captured the interest of business schools (every major 
business school now offers courses in social entrepreneurship); 
books and magazines (“doing well and doing good” is one of the 
hot topics in the business press); philanthropic organizations; and, 
recently, economic development and foreign aid agencies, which are 
helping to launch these new hybrid businesses, or are promoting 
partnerships with them. Y et despite such pervasive interest, little is Introduction      xiii
known about how to make such ventures work, or why some fail and 
others succeed.
  To find out for ourselves, we entered this space in 2001 as a first 
step in creating what is now the Wharton Social Entrepreneurship 
Program. We work on the ground in Africa and in the United 
States with social enterprises—organizations created to address 
and alleviate a social problem by generating a revenue stream. Our 
goal has been to study the challenges of building dual- or multiple-
objective business models under conditions of high uncertainty. 
Since venturing into this space, we have seen firsthand the challenges 
of social enterprises. Some of our enterprises have been quite 
successful, others not, and still others have developed or spun off in 
unanticipated directions.
  Our experience has led us to conclude that there is both good 
news and bad news for social entrepreneurs. First the bad news: 
these organizations face daunting odds as they try to create wealth 
where currently only poverty exists. Doing business in areas where 
markets have failed means high levels of uncertainty that often leave 
well-intentioned social entrepreneurs blindsided by unexpected 
problems. Not surprisingly, one study of revenue-generating 
ventures launched by nonprofits finds that very few actually 
make money.3 Moreover, the same study discovered “a pattern of 
unwarranted optimism” when examining how nonprofits evaluate 
possible ventures.4
  We did promise good news: Despite the dark picture we’ve just 
painted, the odds are not insurmountable. Our years in the field 
have introduced us to social enterprises, such as Zambia Feeds, that 
are quietly making a real impact on society and earning modest 
net revenues. Our work has proved that it is possible to launch a 
successful social enterprise—by taking small steps, focusing on 
discovery versus outcomes, and being constantly vigilant for the 
unexpected. The insights we have gleaned from our field experience 
are the basis for the ideas we present in this book. xiv     Introduction
  The process we have developed does not guarantee success. It 
does, however, increase the chances that, inexpensively and early on, 
you will be able to spot those ventures that simply won’t make it and 
refocus your energy on those that may just have legs, at the same 
time reducing the cost and consequences of those that fail.
Who Should Read This Book?
This book is for anyone who wants to create and run a social enterprise 
that generates revenues or, better yet, profits while alleviating social 
problems. However, despite the revenue-driven perspective we 
cover, the principles and tools in this book will also benefit any of 
the following organizations:
 •  Agencies and charitable organizations attempting to deliver 
poverty alleviation directly;
 •  Foundations and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) facing 
increasingly distressed pleas for funding from the agencies and 
charities they support, while themselves facing reductions in 
resources;
  •  Established firms seeking to deliver meaningful corporate social 
responsibility (CSR) programs or, more selfishly, to build future 
markets at the Bottom of the Pyramid;5
 •  Venture capital firms and impact investors with a social orien-
tation; and
 •  Donors and philanthropists interested in enhancing the impact 
of the funds they donate.
Social Entrepreneurs: Addressing Social Problems 
with Revenue-Generating Solutions
The fundamental purpose of the social enterprise is to address a 
social problem and generate revenues in so doing. The way the 
Wharton Social Entrepreneurship Program does this is to generate 
revenues, preferably net revenues,6 thereby reducing dependency Introduction      xv
and increasing the self-sufficiency and sustainability of an enterprise. 
After 12 years working on the ground with social enterprises, 
we conclude that they typically function in environments much 
different from more traditional entrepreneurial enterprises. One 
major difference is the perceived level of risk. It’s not that social 
entrepreneurs face more risk than traditional entrepreneurs; they 
face greater uncertainty. Although the two terms are often used 
interchangeably, the concepts underlying them are different: risk is 
measurable; uncertainty is unknowable, and therefore immeasurable. 
 Why this higher level of uncertainty? We point to three main 
factors:
 1.    Social entrepreneurs target highly intractable social problems. 
If the problems were not intractable, some profit-seeking enter-
prise would already be earning income by resolving them (or 
exploiting the opportunity).
 2.    Instead of simply entering a market, the social entrepreneur 
often needs to create a market where none yet exists.
 3.    Social entrepreneurs work in uncharted environments that, by 
their very nature, generate uncertainty. All the enterprises we 
worked with met some of, if not all, the following challenges:
  •  Undeveloped markets.  Nascent markets typically offer 
entrepreneurs or firms little idea about what beneficiary/
customer segments to target and what the reactions of those 
segments might be.
  •  Uncertain pricing.  Given that the market is weak, there is 
scarce indication of what prices might be acceptable for the 
products or services envisioned by the social entrepreneur. 
Furthermore, there are few proxies available to provide price 
baselines or bands of comparison. 
  •  Absence of consistently administered (predictable) gover-
nance.  Entrepreneurs can confront mazes of ambiguity 
when they try to navigate the corridors of permissions, xvi     Introduction
people, and policies. Interpretations of legal frameworks 
and their corresponding requirements can be frustratingly 
unclear and often ad hoc.
  •  Unreliable infrastructure.  Nonexistent, poorly developed, 
or poorly maintained infrastructure often translates into 
unacceptably high operational costs and high unreliability 
of transportation, power, water, and labor.
  •  Untested technology. The use of a technology, especially 
a new one, in an undeveloped market environment adds 
additional complexity to the venture, and the new technology 
is unlikely to work as it did in its original environment and 
likely will need to be modified to adapt to local conditions. 
Even then, acceptance is not guaranteed. 
  •  Unpredictable competitive responses.  In environments 
with significant market failures, the nature of competitive 
response may be very different from that in more developed 
markets. For example, over the last two decades in southern 
Africa, we have regularly seen the burning or shooting-up 
of taxis and buses competing for a share of fares between 
new informal (and unregulated) settlements and the cities 
to which commuters need to travel. The “combatants” have 
little concern over whether the vehicles contain passengers.
  Our research and fieldwork show that given the uncertainties 
involved in trying to create a solution via social enterprise, potential 
solutions must be “funneled” in a way that systematically reduces 
their intrinsic uncertainty ahead of major resource commitments. 
  At the start of an initiative in such uncertain environments, 
there are many conceivable approaches, all of which may be equally 
possible . The first challenge is to configure, from among the many 
possible approaches, those that are plausible , and then to reduce 
the uncertainty of these plausible approaches to the point where 
probability distributions can be assigned to outcomes,7 thereby Introduction      xvii
making the approaches progressively plannable —that is, developed 
to the point where more conventional risk assessment and valuation 
methods can be used. This process of moving from uncertainty to risk 
(simplified as Figure I.1) creates a basis from which to experiment 
and learn. The process is designed to help identify those ideas that 
may “have legs” (success potential), guiding the social entrepreneur 
toward a feasible business model (if one exists). It also helps identify, 
early on, those ventures that will likely fail, allowing the social 
entrepreneur to abandon the idea at little cost (either financially to 
the entrepreneur or to the potential beneficiaries) and move on to 
other potential ideas.
From Possible to Plannable—  
A Process for Social Entrepreneurs
Moving from uncertainty to acceptable levels of risk requires a 
different approach from that normally adopted by traditional 
entrepreneurs. In particular, it requires significantly more pre-work, 
experimentation, reality checks, and planning. Much like a sieve 
works, we propose a process of continual feasibility checks and low-
cost trials en route from possible to plannable, ideally having the 
sieve hold back the less doable ideas and letting the most viable ones 
pass through to the next level. In essence, the process is that of an 
enterprising mind-set.
  This front-end work of remorselessly redirecting or abandoning 
ideas is crucial for two reasons. First, resources available to address 
social problems are limited, and are becoming more so every day, so 
it is a tragedy if they are vaingloriously wasted. Second, the cost of 
failing later on in the process may have grave consequences for the 
potential beneficiaries, who are often left to flounder when a venture 
Plannable
 Probable
 Plausible
 Possible
Figure I.1: Moving from Uncertainty to Riskxviii      Introduction
or aid program runs out of funding and pulls up stakes. Figure I.2 
outlines our process for developing social enterprises.
  This book addresses each phase of the process. We have framed 
the book in a way that will constantly guide you in preserving your 
scarce resources and help you do more with less—a perspective in 
keeping with our earlier work8 and one that shares elements of the 
Figure I.2: Building Social Enterprises: A Process
Phase One—From Possible to Plausible:
Pressure Test Y our Start-Up Idea
• Identify your proposed solution
• Specify performance criteria
• Define and segment your target population
• Understand the beneficiary experience
• Analyze the most competitive alternative
• Identify operations realities
• Address the inevitable sociopolitics
• Develop a concept statement
Phase Two—From Plausible to Probable:
Plan Y our Social Enterprise
• Frame and scope the venture
• Specify deliverables
• Establish assumptions and checkpoints
Phase Three—From Probable 
  to Plannable:  Launch and 
Scale Y our Social 
Enterprise
• Launch your enterprise
• Manage the upside  
and downside
• Scale up your  
social enterprise
High levels
of uncertainty
Acceptable
levels of riskIntroduction      xix
newly resurgent “lean thinking” trend in innovation. At this early 
stage, you are spending your imagination and time, rather than your 
funds or those of your supporters.
 •  Phase One: Pressure Test Y our Start-Up Idea.  To enable you to 
progress from possible to plausible, we will help you analyze a 
proposed revenue-generating solution to a social problem; specify 
performance criteria; define and segment your target population 
or beneficiary; understand the beneficiary experience; analyze 
the most competitive alternative; identify operations realities; 
address the inevitable sociopolitics; and, finally, develop a 
concept statement.
 •  Phase Two:  Plan Y our Social Enterprise.  To support you in 
your move from plausible to probable, we will explain how to 
frame and scope the venture, specify deliverables, and establish 
assumptions and checkpoints.
 •  Phase Three:  Launch and Scale Y our Social Enterprise. To help 
you go from probable to plannable, we show how to launch your 
enterprise, manage the upside and downside, and scale your 
enterprise.
  We end each chapter with two short sections: a Chapter Checklist 
and a Tough Love Test. The Chapter Checklist tasks you to review 
what you have done to make sure you are ready to go forward. The 
Tough Love Test asks a series of challenging questions for which only 
a positive response will justify your going further with your project. 
  Social entrepreneurs must beat enormous odds to create a 
business that alleviates widespread social problems (malnutrition 
and unemployment) while making meaningful net revenues (when 
she retired, her enterprise earned a 12% return on sales). For Ilona, 
moving from 6 employees mixing feed by hand to 200 employees 
working in a semi-automated facility required immense discipline 
and a rigorous process to navigate the high degree of uncertainty she 
faced from the get-go. We strongly believe that social entrepreneurs xx     Introduction
who follow the principles and processes we outline in this book put 
themselves in the best possible position to achieve success in this 
challenging arena. PHASE ONE
From Possible to Plausible: 
Pressure Test Your Start-Up IdeaArticulate Your Targeted Problem 
and Substantiate Your Proposed 
Solution
3CHAPTER 1
In 2012, when Ilona retired from the poultry feeds business she 
had started with six men mixing feed with shovels in a shed, the 
social enterprise she had built was producing more than 3,000 tons 
of feed per month—enough to support nearly 2,000 small-scale 
poultry farmers whose combined output delivered nearly 70 million 
daily protein servings per annum to their communities. To do this, 
Ilona had to overcome the manifold uncertainties we described in 
the introduction. What the rest of this book will do is lay out the 
systematic process we developed from our fieldwork with Ilona and 
others, a process that will help anyone concerned with using minimal 
resources to accomplish the greatest good in any organization set up 
to assist those in need. This process can be (and we believe should be) 
used by managers of social enterprises, by managers of NGOs and 
nonprofits, by large firms entering the Bottom of the Pyramid space, 
and by philanthropists interested in seeing that their philanthropic 
funds have maximal impact.
 Given that social entrepreneurs confront such high levels of 
uncertainty, we suggest that from the very beginning you adopt a 
learning approach by initially spending a serious amount of time 
systematically researching the problem and substantiating the 
feasibility of your solution; discussing it with people in the know; 
and bringing to the table a willingness to be open to what your 
research tells you.4     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
 One of the biggest mistakes social entrepreneurs make is to 
charge in with inadequate understanding both of the problem they 
want to address and of the practicability of the solution they have in 
mind. 
  The first step is crucial: carefully articulate the problem and your 
proposed solution. This step has three components:
1. What is the social problem I wish to address? 
 •  Who is suffering? 
 •  What are they suffering from and when? 
 •  What’s causing this suffering? 
 •  How many people are affected? 
 •   Where are they located, and how are they geographically 
distributed?
2. What is my solution?
 •  How will my enterprise alleviate the problem?
 •  Who and how many will benefit?
 •  What major costs will be incurred?
 •   If it is to be a business, how will revenue (income) be generated? 
If it is not to be a business, how will operating funds be secured? 
3.  What will beneficiaries have to do differently for my proposed 
solution to work?
 •   This is very important: What behavior changes am I seeking 
on the part of the target beneficiaries? 
 •   In particular: How difficult will it be for us to effect these 
behavior changes?
 To illustrate these three components of the first step, let’s look at 
Ilona and Zambia Feeds.Articulate Your Targeted Problem and Substantiate Your Proposed Solution      5
Articulate the Problem/Solution: Zambia Feeds 
When Ilona approached what was to become the Wharton Social 
Entrepreneurship Program about a severe malnutrition and 
unemployment problem in the Copperbelt and northwestern 
provinces of Zambia, she explained to us that the region, with 
approximately 2 million inhabitants, had experienced up to 50% 
unemployment at times over the previous two decades, mainly 
because of copper mine closures. Furthermore, those out of work 
did not have easily transferable or marketable skills. Without 
money, they couldn’t afford food (particularly food rich in protein) 
for themselves and their families. With her experience in animal 
husbandry and animal feeds, Ilona chose poultry farming as the 
start to a solution—small-scale poultry production doesn’t require 
advanced skills and needs very little capital investment.
 The largest cost (approximately 70% of the cost of goods sold) 
of producing poultry is the feed consumed by the fowls. At the time, 
national poultry production was dominated by a few established 
commercial growers, who sold their meat in larger, wealthier urban 
areas. Ilona observed that the existing suppliers of feed mixes were 
geographically distant and produced what she believed to be lower-
quality products, with a resultant lower yield in animal output. 
Furthermore, she believed the incumbent feeds producers to be 
oligopolistic, overpriced, and indifferent to the potential of two 
highly underserved market segments: subsistence farmers and small-
scale commercial poultry producers in the rural areas remote from 
the major towns. If she could find a way to produce and distribute 
higher-quality feeds for a lower price, she could team up with a 
company already producing cornmeal and flour and start a feeds 
business—creating a new market for small poultry producers in 
remote northwest Zambia, who, as they built their own businesses, 
would buy ever more of the product. Of course, she would need to 
educate her potential new customers (the currently unemployed or 
underemployed) about chicken farming and its benefits to them and 
their families. 6     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
 Thus, she would articulate her problem as follows:
What is the social problem I wish to address? 
Malnutrition and unemployment in the Copperbelt region of 
northwestern Zambia.
 •   Who is suffering? The large undernourished and underemployed 
population in northwestern Zambia.
 •   What are they suffering from and when? Poor nutrition (partic-
ularly, low protein consumption). The problem is ongoing.
 •   What’s causing this suffering? Low or no incomes due to poor 
employment opportunities.
 •   How many people are affected? Between 500,000 and 1 million, 
depending on the season and geographic expanse included in 
the early estimates.
What is my solution?
Develop a commercial feed production business (selling poultry 
feed) that would open up new rural markets comprising subsistence 
and small-scale poultry farmers, who could then feed their families 
(addressing malnutrition) and sell surplus birds in the local markets 
(generating earnings and employment).
What will beneficiaries have to do differently for my  
proposed solution to work?
The unemployed and the current subsistence farmers (potential 
customers, or “users” of her feed products) would need to understand 
and agree on the benefits of rearing chickens and be willing to learn 
and execute the entire process of rearing and selling chickens.
Articulate the Problem/Solution: Ikotoilet
Let’s turn to a case outside the Wharton Social Entrepreneurship 
Program to offer a second illustration of the articulation process, Articulate Your Targeted Problem and Substantiate Your Proposed Solution      7
namely Ecotact, a private, for-profit company that addresses sani-
tation problems in developing nations. The company received start-
up funds from the Acumen Fund,9 a nonprofit global venture fund 
that uses entrepreneurial approaches to solve problems of global 
poverty. One of its products is the Ikotoilet, a freestanding pay-per-
use sanitation center that has since been installed in many towns in 
East Africa. Here is how articulating the problem would look for the 
Ikotoilet.
  Globally, nearly 2.5 billion people lack access to proper sani-
tation, half of whom must defecate in open sewers due to lack of 
infrastructure.10 This “sanitation system” serves as a virulent breeding 
ground for cholera and dysentery, resulting in staggering social 
costs: high rates of morbidity and mortality as a result of diarrheal 
diseases. In Kenya alone, one in five children under the age of 10 
dies of diarrheal diseases. Taking a cue from Mahatma Gandhi, who 
once said that “Sanitation is more important than independence, ” 
Ecotact founder David Kuria challenged himself to find a business 
solution to sanitation problems in Africa, while at the same time to 
make a small profit that would at the very least be enough to keep 
the business sustainable. Kuria realized that while the problem could 
not be quickly solved globally, it could be addressed at least in East 
Africa, starting in Kenya. 
What is the social problem I wish to address?
Poor sanitation in East Africa, beginning with Kenya. 
 •   Who is suffering? The densely concentrated urban populations 
of the region.
 •   What are they suffering from and when? Relatively high levels 
of preventable, debilitating, and often fatal gastrointestinal 
diseases such as diarrhea. The problem is ongoing.
 •   What’s causing this suffering? Poor sanitation is a persistent 
culprit for infection.8     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
 •   How many people are affected? Approximately 9 million (22% 
of the total population of 43 million).
What is my solution?
Build sanitation stations (Ikotoilets), initially in Kenya, and expand 
later throughout East Africa, which users could access on a pay-per-
use basis.
What will beneficiaries have to do differently for my proposed 
solution to work?
Kuria’s problem was that even if he charged very little, would he be 
able to compete with a system that, in the eyes of many people, was 
basically free? Potential users (customers) were currently “paying” 
nothing for sanitation services—they simply defecated in sewage pits 
or in the street at night. It was going to require a significant amount 
of effort both to educate potential toilet users and to convince them 
that what they thought they were getting for “free” actually came at 
great social cost (e.g., morbidity and mortality caused by fecal-borne 
disease). This is a typical “tragedy of the commons” situation: “Even 
if I do pay to use the toilets, if others do not, infection will continue. ”
  Once you have put together your initial description of the social 
problem, your solution, and the beneficiaries’ required behavioral 
changes, you can analyze your population of proposed beneficiaries 
to identify the different segments of the population and target which 
segments you will engage with first, as your seed segment, and why. 
This will be covered in the next chapter.
Establish Plausibility Criteria
Establishing a defining set of criteria that your business must meet to 
justify moving forward is one of the most powerful ways to prune out 
implausible ideas, saving precious resources for the more plausible 
ones.Articulate Your Targeted Problem and Substantiate Your Proposed Solution      9
  Two types of criteria shape such pruning. We deliberately use 
the “pruning” metaphor; your yield of fruit is much larger and of 
much higher quality if you prune a fruit tree back to fewer high-
yielding branches instead of letting it grow uncontrolled and wild, 
which results in a paltry yield.
Screen-Out Criteria: Y our Institutional Disqualifiers
Screen-out criteria are what you use to disqualify automatically any 
proposed project, no matter what other redeeming features it has. 
These are really tough criteria and should be kept to a minimum. A 
project that fails even one of these criteria is presumed to be doomed 
from the start or totally in conflict with your values, and therefore 
should be dropped. A project that incurs even one such disqualifying 
condition should automatically be screened out unless you can come 
up with a strategy to mitigate the offending condition.
  The Wharton Social Entrepreneurship Program’s list of dis-
qualifiers was developed over the 12 years we have worked with social 
entrepreneurs in the United States and several African nations. We 
will screen out any venture:
 •  That generates dependency rather than self-sufficiency; 
 •   That will be located in countries where corruption (and/
or bribery) is rampant, deeply embedded, and not able to be 
circumvented;
 •   Where any necessary equipment is not highly robust, simple to 
operate, and easy to repair;
 •   Whose operations require a large percentage of employees to 
have advanced technical qualifications;*
 •    Where (eventually) the net revenues from activities are insuf-
ficient to cover replacement  of assets;
 •   Where workers or partners involved in the project will earn 
less than the nationally stipulated minimum wage;
*This is particularly important in rural Africa and other developing regions.10     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
 •   Where a pilot business cannot be launched and run at low cost;
 •   Where you do not believe you will successfully effect the 
requisite beneficiary behavior change; and
 •   Where U.S. or host country laws will be transgressed.
  Note that these disqualifiers need not be your  disqualifiers. Y ou 
surely will want to generate your own. But to the extent that you 
create similar disqualifiers, you certainly will reduce the number of 
costly and ultimately unsuccessful projects you undertake.
  Note also that we have had to turn our backs on many projects, 
often with enormous regret, but we have thereby also been able 
to avoid pouring resources into what would have ended up as 
unsuccessful efforts.
Screen-In Criteria: Conditions That Increase the  
Attractiveness of a Project
Screen-in criteria are those that we believe enhance the attractiveness 
of projects. Unlike with the screen-out criteria, where the presence 
of only one disqualifies the project, the more screen-in criteria 
present, the more attractive the project becomes. In other words, 
screen-in criteria are cumulative builders of attractiveness, and if 
you score competing projects on these project-boosting criteria, you 
can use their total scores to choose among those projects. We have 
also found it useful to use the criteria as a creativity trigger, asking 
what we might be able to do to enhance a project along the criterion 
being considered.
 Our screen-in criteria include the following:
 •   The number of people who will be helped will be high (instead 
of dozens, perhaps hundreds, if not thousands, of beneficiaries).
 •   The direness of the problem to be attacked is high (the reduction 
in suffering is high).
 •   The project has large long-term benefits.
 •   Key stakeholders will be highly supportive of the project.Articulate Your Targeted Problem and Substantiate Your Proposed Solution      11
 •   Beneficiaries are highly receptive to the solution.
 •   The degree of on-the-ground experience of the team is high.
 •   Experience of the lead entrepreneur is extensive.
 •   Testing on a small scale (low cost, short time frame) is easy.
  Note: We emphasize the importance of low-cost testing by 
including it on both the screen-out (reject any project that cannot 
be tested at low cost) and screen-in (the easier it is to test, the more 
attractive it is) criteria. 
  Y ou can convert these criteria into a scoring table to compare 
competing projects in terms of attractiveness (if you have a number 
of potential projects in mind or different approaches to the same 
project). For example, Table 1.1 shows how the Zambia Feeds project 
fared on the screen-in criteria.
 Very low  > Very high
Number of people who will benefit 1     2     3     4     5 
Suffering of beneficiary as a result of problem 1     2     3     4     5
Long-term social impact potential of project 1     2     3     4     5
Degree of key stakeholder support for project 1     2     3     4     5
Receptiveness of beneficiaries to solution 1     2     3     4     5
Degree of local knowledge and experience of  1     2     3     4     5
team and/or advisors
Degree of entrepreneurial experience of  1     2     3     4     5
management
Ease of testing on a small scale  1     2     3     4     5
(low cost, short time frame)
Total Score 32 of a possible 40Table 1.1: Screen-In Criteria for Zambia Feeds 12     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
  Scoring allows you to see problems you may need to resolve 
before moving ahead. In this example, Ilona anticipated a fairly low 
receptiveness level on the part of the beneficiaries: people might feel 
inadequate to the task of raising small batches of chickens for sale 
or for their own consumption. If she felt she couldn’t do anything to 
change this, she would not have launched the project. She decided, 
however, that through a series of informational seminars in villages 
and with the support of influential resident community members, 
she could get the buy-in from enough farmer recruits to start her 
company. The success of the first farmers would ramp up attendance 
at subsequent seminars, where she would respond to questions from 
newly minted farmers.
  In high-uncertainty environments, this set of preliminary fil-
tering criteria is a key weapon for driving down the probability and 
incidence of failure. Our 12 years of experience on the ground have 
shown us that the presence in a project of any one of the disqualifying 
conditions  we use will at best severely cripple if not kill a project. 
Ideas are limitless; time and resources are not. By identifying and 
killing disqualified projects from the get-go—and not later, after 
you have expended energy and wasted resources—you will have 
the resources to launch projects with higher chances of success. 
Projects that survive the disqualifying screen can then be rated for 
their screen-in scores. If you have only one project, you can develop 
screen-in scores for major locations or customer segments and select 
the highest-scoring segments to focus your start-up. 
Start to Assemble an Advisory Group for Purposes  
of Validation
Now that you have begun to build a sense of the problem and the 
possible solution to it, you must consider whether you have advisors 
with adequate on-the-ground knowledge of the environment. If you 
do not have people with such knowledge on your project already, you Articulate Your Targeted Problem and Substantiate Your Proposed Solution      13
need to identify and recruit them now. The role of this group, at this 
stage, is primarily to provide concept validation and market insight.
  Begin with one or two knowledgeable advisors to act as 
sounding boards. As your venture progresses, you can augment your 
advisory group with appropriate and useful members (start small 
and snowball) and, in so doing, build an influential support group to 
provide concept validation, implementation guidance, and help on 
stakeholder management.
  In the Zambia Feeds case, Ilona first made certain she had the 
support of the CEO of the milling company with whom she had 
teamed up to implement the project and of a salesperson from the 
region in which she would be launching. As the venture developed, 
she gradually augmented her informal board of advisors with experts 
in animal nutrition, veterinary science, and feed production systems. 
By the time the venture was ready to scale, she had built a formidable 
advisory group of influential people from both within and outside 
her region of operations.
  Once you have secured the advice and support of your first 
experienced advisors, you can begin to dig more deeply into the 
context and environment of your proposed beneficiaries.
Chapter Checklist
Following the processes outlined in this chapter, you will have:
 m Articulated the social problem. 
 m Articulated the proposed solution. 
 m  Articulated what the beneficiaries will need to do differently 
for your solution to work.
 m  Developed disqualifying criteria for screening out highly vul-
nerable ideas and screen-in criteria that will enhance the plaus-
ibility and attractiveness of the project.
 m  Started to assemble an advisory board and begun validating 
your problem and proposed solution with the board.14     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
  Now we ask you to subject your idea to the first of the Tough 
Love Tests you will encounter in this book. The idea is to challenge 
yourself to make sure you have done the homework needed to avoid 
going forward with a poorly formulated venture and thereby wasting 
scarce resources on a project doomed to failure. 
Tough Love Test
If you answer no to any of the following questions, you should 
seriously reconsider your idea. If you answer no three times or more, 
you should drop the idea. It simply won’t be worth your time and 
resources if you cannot surmount the challenges at this early stage. If 
you answer yes to all the following questions, by all means, continue 
exploring your idea.
 1.  Are you confident that you have specified the full dimensions 
of the social problem with respect to its scope, dispersion, and 
distribution?
 2.  Are you confident that you have identified a solution that will 
work in the context of the environment where your product or 
service is going to be delivered?
 3.  Have you carefully thought through any changes in behavior 
your beneficiaries will need to make in order to benefit from 
your solution? Are you confident that you will eventually be 
able to effect that behavioral change? 
 4.  Does the proposed venture avoid your screen-out criteria?
 5.  Does the proposed venture score high on your screen-in criteria?
 6.  Have you begun to develop an advisory group of people “in 
the know”?
 7.  Have you discussed your project’s feasibility with your advisory 
group, which should comprise people who are knowledgeable 
about the environment and people knowledgeable about the 
social condition you are tackling?Specify Performance Criteria
15CHAPTER 2
If your idea still looks plausible, you can now turn to performance 
expectations, which comprise your specifications of social impact 
and financial outcome.
Unit of Social Impact 
Y ou need to decide on a unit of social impact, which specifies how 
you will measure the benefits being delivered by your program, 
such as lives saved, disease cases cured, number of children able to 
read, food available and consumed, and so on. Specifying the unit 
of social impact forces you to think about how you are going to rate 
your performance and measure it, and thereby, how you are going 
to communicate to the world and stakeholders (people who have a 
vested interest in your outcome) what social impact your project is 
delivering. It often requires a lot of (perhaps uncomfortable) thought 
to come up with a clearly articulated measure by which you and 
others will be able judge the social value and contribution of your 
enterprise.
  A way to approach this is to revisit your problem analysis and 
solution and think of an outcome metric that will measure the 
impact you intended. The challenge is to select a unit of social impact 
measurement that closely correlates with your desired social benefit. 
For instance, Ilona of Zambia Feeds reasoned that an adequate way 
of reflecting an easing of hunger and malnutrition was to estimate 
the number of daily protein portions per year that would result from 
the consumption of the chickens of growers who purchased her 
feed. While not precise, this unit of impact goes straight to the social 16     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
bottom line: every pound of chicken feed sold yields an estimable 
poundage of chicken meat that can be consumed by the population 
in her target area. 
  Kuria of Ecotact had a more difficult problem: It is virtually 
impossible to measure the reduction of disease resulting from his 
Ikotoilets; the social impact of prevention is always difficult to 
measure. What he could do is measure the number of uses of his 
facilities. Then, for purposes of estimating actual social impact, he 
could use available data from sources such as the World Health 
Organization to infer the number of infections and deaths avoided 
by the use of his toilet facilities. While such data may not provide 
precise estimates, they do provide a plausible basis for reasonable 
estimations of infections and deaths avoided. 
Unit of Revenue
For financial performance, you need to decide on the unit of 
revenue, namely, the elements for which payers will pay and thus 
generate the revenues needed for operating the project. Examples of 
revenue units are items sold, paid service hours delivered, and paid 
contracts completed. As we note later in this chapter, the beneficiary 
is not necessarily the one who pays. In the case of Ilona’s project, 
the revenue unit she selected was a 25 kilogram (kg) bag of feed 
purchased by a chicken farmer; in the case of Kuria’s Ikotoilet, the 
revenue unit was a single use of his Ikotoilet. 
  Before you go any further toward starting the actual project, 
it will pay off handsomely to discuss your proposed metrics with 
potential stakeholders, getting their buy-in so that they are assured 
that you will be disciplined and that they can track your progress.
  However, such stakeholders will be interested not only in how 
you are going to monitor performance, but also in what levels of 
social impact and financial performance you hope to achieve. And 
before you can realistically decide on the levels of outcome you 
intend to achieve, you need to examine realistically:Specify Performance Criteria      17
 • What you need to be able to do to deliver your social impact, and
 •  What the reaction will be by those who will be affected by the 
success of your project.
  Upcoming chapters attend to these issues: Chapter 4 is devoted 
to deciding what activities and capabilities will be needed to actually 
deliver your intended social impact, and chapter 5 is focused on 
analyzing key stakeholders who could materially influence the venture 
outcome. Once these assessments have been done, we can turn to 
setting minimum realistic performance targets for the venture.
Beneficiaries Are Not Necessarily the Ones Who Pay
In social-entrepreneurial settings, the beneficiary is not necessarily 
the person paying for the product or service. In many cases, a third 
party—maybe a governmental or nongovernmental organization—
will pay. If this is the case with your idea, you will need to take into 
account how likely the third party is to pay and their capabilities to 
do so. It may be useful to use the language users and payers rather 
than customers. 
  In the case of nonprofits, while you may not be generating 
business-like sales revenues, the cold reality is that there has to be 
a source of funds to support your operations. For a nonprofit, the 
funding unit needs to be specified in place of a revenue unit. This 
funding unit might be an average annual donation, an average annual 
grant approved, or even the securing of one major grant annually, 
but you need to specify the key measures you will use to monitor 
progress in securing sufficient funds, at minimum, to cover the total 
costs of operations.
  An example of this is the Hippo Roller. Traveling around Africa, 
social entrepreneur Grant Gibbs was struck by the amount of time 
and effort women villagers spent collecting water. In poor, rural 
communities a water source may be many miles away, and walking 
there to collect the day’s water needs is backbreaking (almost 18     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
literally), hugely time-consuming work that is delegated primarily to 
women. Gibbs wondered about the effects of this work on women. 
Beyond the physical degradation to their bodies (many women in 
Africa suffer from premature spinal aging because of this work), this 
work also prevented them (and their daughters) from going to school 
or working. Gibbs devised a simple, elegant solution: a barrel-shaped 
strong plastic container that can hold 90 liters (24 gallons) of water 
with a handle attached to the axis of the barrel allowing the user to 
either push or pull the barrel. His beneficiaries (users), however, did 
not have the money to pay for the barrels. Instead, Gibbs decided 
to go to sponsors (payers), such as the World Food Programme and 
other NGOs, who in return for their sponsorship (i.e., paying for the 
production and distribution of the rollers) would have their logos 
printed on the round caps that seal the barrels. In this case, therefore, 
the revenue unit becomes a batch of funded rollers with a sponsor’s 
logo; and the unit of social impact is the roller itself, with the imputed 
hours of water-carrying saved and a reduction in physiological 
damage. In his planning, therefore, Gibbs takes into account how 
many batches of rollers he is required “sell” to third parties (payers) 
in order to accomplish his social goals in assisting users.
  Gibbs has undertaken a redesign of the roller in recent years. 
Once again, its original use is morphing into other uses, and it is 
attracting other users: in certain locales, the Hippo Roller is now 
also being used as a base for mobile retail kiosks, where shelves are 
mounted on the roller axle and fixed on the handle above the roller, 
which then serves as the mobile shop’s wheel. It is also being used 
by small-scale produce farmers to roll their produce to market, 
the roller being cheaper and far more navigable over poor-quality, 
muddy roads than a bicycle.
  In the Wharton Social Entrepreneurship Program, we first deter-
mine the appropriate metrics and then decide on what the minimum 
required performance targets are in order that the venture deliver 
goals considered worth the time and effort of all those involved. Specify Performance Criteria      19
This approach allows us to develop and model any proposed venture 
before launching it. In the planning stage, we will show you how 
to set these minimums and then how to scope, frame, and build a 
venture operations model prior to investing in the actual venture. 
We prefer that our modeling show us if our assumptions about the 
impact of a new venture are wrong, so the venture can fail or be 
redirected on paper before failing in the field—it is cheaper that way. 
Chapter Checklist
Following the processes outlined in this chapter, you will have:
 m   Decided on units of social impact to measure social impact  
(by which you intend to measure and monitor social perfor-
mance progress) and discussed and validated it with potential 
supporters.
 m    Decided on a revenue unit (by which you will measure and 
monitor financial performance progress) and discussed and 
validated it with potential supporters. 
 
  With this in mind, you can now turn to the Tough Love Test.
Tough Love Test
If you answer no to any of the following questions, you should 
seriously reconsider your idea. If you answer no three times or more, 
you should drop the idea. It simply won’t be worth your time and 
resources if you cannot surmount the challenges at this early stage. If 
you answer yes to all the following questions, by all means, continue 
exploring your idea.
 1.   Are you confident that the proposed unit of social impact 
is appropriate for measuring and monitoring progress in 
achieving social outcomes? Does your advisory board agree?
 2.   Are you confident that the proposed revenue unit is appropriate 
for measuring and monitoring progress in achieving financial 
outcomes? Does your advisory board agree?20     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
 3.   If the beneficiaries will not be paying for the product or ser-
vice, have you identified one or more other parties who will pay 
for it? 
 4.   Do these parties agree with your proposed unit of social impact 
and revenue units?Define and Segment Your  
Target Population
21CHAPTER 3
Next you need to define a population segment to start with 
in order to further test your idea. Again, pursue small starts 
and learn before investing much money. Ask yourself: Who of the 
proposed beneficiaries are most likely to adopt my offering? Where 
are they located? Are enough of them willing to adopt my offering 
to warrant my efforts and demonstrate evidence that my concept is 
sound? Is reaching them possible at an acceptable cost?
Segment Y our Target Market
Y our beneficiary population is unlikely to be completely homo-
geneous, and targeted segmentation of the population is critical 
for increasing the chance of early traction. The idea is to think of a 
subset of your beneficiaries with whom you hope to gain as rapid an 
acceptance as possible at minimal cost. One way is to select a target 
segment that scores highly on a “willingness to adopt” measure. The 
10 attractiveness features listed here are those we used to develop a 
score sheet for different segments of the beneficiary population. This 
list can be used as a starting point for your endeavor, but should be 
modified, as you learn, to reflect your specific case.
Ten Attractiveness Features Increasing Willingness to Adopt
 1.   Their perception of the need to benefit: Are they aware of their 
need for your proposed benefit?22     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
 2.   Connectedness of actions to positive outcome: Do they clearly 
recognize the link between the actions you propose and the 
expected positive outcomes?
 3.   Salience to customer: How much does the need matter to them?
 4.   Urgency to customer: How long might they postpone having 
the need satisfied?
 5.   Visibility of benefit: How easy is it for them to see the benefit?
 6.   Timeliness of effect: How quickly is the effect of the benefit 
observable?
 7.   Credibility of the benefactor: How much do they believe your 
solution will help?
 8.   Performance contingency: How sure is the solution to work?
 9.   Reversibility of effect: If the benefit stops, does the problem 
return?
  10.  Fundability of the benefit by or for them: Can they afford the 
solution, or will someone else pay for it on their behalf?11
  These generic attractiveness features work well with most 
projects, but are neither mandatory nor exhaustive. In creating your 
own list, you may want to remove features that don’t fit your venture 
or add those that fit your venture more closely.
  From your version of this list, generate a score sheet to compare 
the market segments on their views of the potential solution. To create 
the score sheet, first identify several types of potential beneficiaries 
(or customers). In the case of Zambia Feeds, the first three segments 
Ilona identified were (i) large commercial producers, (ii) small-scale 
producers, and (iii) villagers (free-range growers).
Define and Segment Y our Market: Zambia Feeds 
Ilona felt confident that she fully understood the potential 
beneficiaries of her enterprise, and the competitive landscape she 
was entering. Having grown up in the area, she was very familiar Define and Segment Your Target Population      23
with local customs, language, and sociopolitical conditions, thus 
she possessed great insight into which beneficiaries might be most 
likely to adopt her idea. She also had the advantage of having worked 
in agriculture and animal husbandry, which gave her key insights 
into her competition, including their geographic location and 
concentration, distribution reach, and pricing schemes. Her initial 
target customer segment, or beneficiary segment, was the small-
scale, primarily rural subsistence farmers interested in improving 
their lives without having to relocate. To further test her intuition, 
however, she created a table (Table 3.1), based on the list of 10 
attractiveness features.
  Y ou need to develop a set of criteria (attractiveness features) for 
your choice of segment, though it may be useful to start with the 
ones we used or the ones in the following tables, weeding out any that  
are inappropriate for your project and adding any that are germane 
to you.
  Scoring is done as follows: As you go down the list of attractiveness 
features, rank how the relevant segment stacks up against each 
feature. A ranking of 3 is the highest, 2 is medium, 1 is low. 
  The objective of this exercise is to see which segment is most 
attractive, and therefore most likely to get traction, so that it can 
be assessed as a possible seed segment for which you launch your 
enterprise. Based on this table, it is clear that the most promising 
market segment, and therefore the seed segment to start with, is the 
small-scale chicken producer, which scored 22. Once the company 
was established, Ilona would be positioned to encourage the next-
most-promising segment—namely, villagers rearing free-range 
chickens—to buy her feed and then build small-scale chicken coops 
after they were convinced of the merits of the proposition. Selling to 
larger commercial producers would have to wait, if she attended to 
them at all.24     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
 Large Small- Free-
 commercial scale range
 producer producer villager
1. Pervasiveness—scale and  1 2 3
scope of the segment need
2. Acceptance of your offering by 1 3 2 
customer and other key players
3. Salience to customer— 1 2 3
Is the need your solution meets 
important to the customer 
compared with other needs?
4. Urgency to customer— 1 2 1
Is it important that the need 
be satisfied soon, or can it wait?
5. Visibility of benefit— 2 3 1
Can the satisfaction of the 
need be easily observed?
6. Timeliness of effect— 1 2 1
Can the need be quickly 
satisfied by your offering, or 
will it be delayed?
7. Credibility of your company— 2 1 1
Is it seen as legitimate, qualified, 
and competent?
8. Performance contingency— 2 3 2
Is your solution sure to work?
9. Competitiveness of your  1 2 1
solution—How does it fare 
against alternative solutions?
10. Fundability of the purchase  3 2 1
and use by segment—Is your 
solution fundable?
Total 15 22 16Table 3.1: Segment Attractiveness Factors—Zambia Feeds Define and Segment Your Target Population      25
Define and Segment Y our Market: Ikotoilet
For the Ikotoilet solution to be accepted, beneficiaries would need 
to change the way they thought about sanitation. Potential users/
customers were currently paying nothing for sanitation services; 
they simply defecated in open sewage areas or in the street at night. 
It would require a significant amount of work both to educate 
potential buyers and to convince them that what they thought they 
were getting for free12 was actually costing a great deal in the long 
run (e.g., in morbidity and mortality caused by fecal-borne disease).
Potential Market Segments
Although the problem is widespread throughout the world, Kuria, 
founder of Ecotact, chose to begin in Kenya, a country he knew 
well, and within a specific city, namely Nairobi. Now he had to find 
a market segment that could see the value of his solution and that 
had the means to pay for it. There appeared to be three potential 
beneficiary types, based on population location:
 1.   Local markets.  Generally outdoor markets where people buy 
and sell goods and services. Public toilet pits can be found 
in many of these markets, but they are generally extremely 
unhygienic. People coming and going to markets generally 
have some, though perhaps not a lot of, money.
 2.   Central business districts.  Administrative and commercial 
centers of towns where one finds government offices and small 
to large businesses. Some buildings have their own toilets, but 
others do not. People visiting the town and people who work in 
buildings without toilets are generally obliged to use municipal 
toilets, many of which are free but generally badly maintained, 
highly unsanitary, and in some cases very unsafe. The people 
in these districts generally have some money.
 3.   Estates/townships. Large “ghettos” that have very little in 
terms of infrastructure. Residents are overwhelmingly poor, 26     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
and personal safety is a major concern, especially at night. 
Some have communal toilet pits, and others have no sanitation 
whatsoever. Many residents resort to “flying toilets”: plastic 
bags defecated in and then hurled into the street after dark.
  Table 3.2 rates each of these potential markets in relation to 
selected aspects of Kuria’s proposed solution.
  Based on the criteria, central business districts and local markets 
emerge as the segments where the Ikotoilet could get early traction. 
Over time, the project could eventually be migrated to the estates/
townships. The scores for the central business district and the markets 
are close, and much higher than that for the estates/townships. Kuria 
chose central business districts as the seed segment to demonstrate 
feasibility. But the major impact would be on markets, and eventually 
the estates/townships. As the project took hold, he focused on 
markets and then found that bus stations were major areas where 
toilet facilities could be offered at low prices to people who had some 
money and a need for privacy. 
  In your case, you will need to decide which of the 10 (and any 
other project-specific) attractiveness features fit your particular 
project and then generate a table similar to Table 3.2. Here it would 
pay to get input from your advisory group and people knowledgeable 
about the problem, and/or the location in which you intend to attack 
the problem, to help you identify key segments, formulate criteria, 
and rate the segments on those criteria. 
  Again, do not spend huge amounts of time building these scoring 
tables and arguing over close scores. When operating in conditions of 
high uncertainty, you would rather be “roughly right” than “precisely 
wrong, ” particularly in the early days, as you learn your way into the 
new venture. Ecotact’s Ikotoilet is a fascinating example of how, as the 
uncertain project unfolded, the locations in which it was executed 
(bus stations) were different from those expected.Define and Segment Your Target Population      27
  Central 
 Local business Estates/
 markets districts townships
1. Pervasiveness—scale and  3 2 3
scope of the segment need
2. Acceptance of your offering by 2 3 1 
customer and other key players
3. Salience to customer— 2 3 1
Is the need your solution meets 
important to the customer 
compared with other needs?
4. Urgency to customer— 3 1 1
Is it important that the need 
be satisfied soon, or can it wait?
5. Visibility of benefit— 2 3 1
Can the satisfaction of the 
need be easily observed?
6. Timeliness of effect— 2 1 3
Can the need be quickly 
satisfied by your offering, or 
will it be delayed?
7. Credibility of your company— 2 3 1
Is it seen as legitimate, qualified, 
and competent?
8. Performance contingency— 2 3 1
Is your solution sure to work?
9. Competitiveness of your  2 3 1
solution—How does it fare 
against alternative solutions?
10. Fundability of the purchase  2 3 1
and use by segment—Is your 
solution fundable?
Total 22 25 14Table 3.2: Segment Attractiveness Factors—Ikotoilet28     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
Chapter Checklist
Following the processes outlined in this chapter, you will have:
 m  Specified some major beneficiary segments.
 m   Generated a set of attractiveness features against which your 
segments were scored (starting with our list, but tailoring it to 
your project).
 m   Applied the attractiveness features to those segments. 
 m   Articulated a high-scoring seed segment with which you could 
test-launch your idea.
 m   Discussed the market and segments with your advisory group.
  With this in mind, now turn to the Tough Love Test.
Tough Love Test
If you answer no to any of the following questions, you should 
seriously reconsider your idea. If you answer no three times or more, 
you should drop the idea. It simply won’t be worth your time and 
resources if you cannot surmount the challenges at this early stage. 
If you answer yes to all of the following questions, by all means, 
continue exploring your idea.
 1.   Are you and your advisors satisfied that you have developed 
meaningful project-specific attractiveness features for scoring 
the attractiveness of your beneficiary segments?
 2.   Are you and your advisors confident that you have identified 
distinct segments of your beneficiary population that will 
respond differently to your proposed solution?
 3.   Have you scored these segments according to your attractiveness 
features, as in Tables 3.1 and 3.2, and selected a target segment 
with which you estimate you will get the most traction early in 
the launch?
 4.   Have your advisory board members agreed that this specifically 
articulated population segment is the target segment with which 
to test your idea?Understand the Beneficiary  
Experience
29CHAPTER 4
It’s easy to get excited about an idea—one that you think is going to 
change the world. Y et seemingly great ideas are often received with 
indifference, if not outright rejection, by their intended beneficiaries. 
Why this frequent disconnect?
  Many would-be social entrepreneurs grow up and first work in 
developed nations and later attempt to create solutions for emerging 
nations or for pockets within their own nations characterized 
by grinding social woe. This outsider status frequently results in a 
misunderstanding of the market and of the “need” for one’s solution.13
 If you view the challenges of others through your own lens of 
limited contextual understanding, you run the risk of proposing a 
solution that is not deployable in the beneficiaries’ environment. 
In a case involving attempts to stem HIV/AIDS in Africa, cultural 
naïveté (at best) or cultural arrogance (at worst) illustrates this lack 
of contextual insight. In the early 1990s it became clear to many 
Western NGOs and governments that the condoms they were 
distributing in African nations were simply not being used. The 
conventional wisdom in the West was that the populations in these 
nations were in denial, or simply being fatalistic by choosing not to 
use condoms. 
  Susan Watkins, a professor of sociology at the University of 
Pennsylvania, thought there had to be more to the story. She followed 
the same group of women in Malawi from 1991 to 2005 to better 
understand their views of HIV/AIDS and condom use, documenting 
conversations they had with one another, whether at the local water 
source or in small groups in the fields or the village. She found a very 30     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
active population of women who were keenly aware of the ravages of 
AIDS. Only, the Western panacea of “give them condoms” ignored 
deeply ingrained social norms, and the fact that many women 
wanted to have children (women’s fertility is highly valued in most 
African nations) and many were afraid their husbands, if forced to 
use condoms, would leave or evict them.
  Cultural naïveté or even arrogance often leads to one of the most 
common and critical business mistakes: having a product orientation 
rather than a beneficiary orientation. A product orientation means 
that you charge ahead creating the offering you want without taking 
into account what the users want, expecting them to readily accept 
what you have to offer. Safeguarding against this requires a keen 
understanding of the potential beneficiaries of your solution and 
how they see the “problem” you have identified. In the rest of the 
book, we emphasize the idea that your challenge is to “sell” your 
offering into a population of (perhaps unconvinced) beneficiaries. 
We shall often speak of the beneficiary of your effort as a “customer” 
in a “market” for your offering in which there is “competition” in the 
form of alternative options for the beneficiary.
  To repeat: One of the biggest mistakes an entrepreneur can 
make is to have a product rather than a beneficiary (or customer) 
orientation. To avoid having a product rather than a beneficiary 
orientation, the first step is to take a serious look at the offering 
from the perspective of the beneficiaries by systematically thinking 
through the entire set of experiences your target segment must go 
through in order to derive a benefit from your offering. It is amazing 
how many projects fail because well-intentioned individuals or 
groups neglect to look at those projects from the point of view of the 
people they aspire to help.
Beneficiary Experience: Zambia Feeds 
Ilona, like any other entrepreneur, could not simply assume that 
producing and selling high-quality, low-cost feed would result in Understand the Bene ficiary Experience      31
the production of chicken meat. She would need to recruit and train 
locals to use her product (animal feed) to raise their chickens.
 These farmers would need to go through many steps before 
the feed they purchased could be converted into chicken sales at 
the local market. Before farmers can sell chickens at market, they 
must transport those chickens to market, and before that, rear the 
chickens, which means they must:
 • House them;
 • Feed them;
 • Water them;
 • Keep them warm;
 • Vaccinate them; and
 • Keep the facilities clean (biosecurity).
And before rearing them, they must:
 • Purchase chicks (from a third-party supplier) to be fed. 
And before that:
 • Store feed.
And before that:
 • Transport feed to a poultry house. 
And before that:
 • Purchase feed. 
And before that:
 • Raise funds to start rearing. 
And before that:
 • Learn how to rear chickens. 
And before that:
 • Decide to rear chickens. 32     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
And before that:
 • Hear about the poultry rearing program.
  Get the idea? Beneficiaries may need to do an awful lot to 
experience the benefit of your solution, especially if, up to now, the 
only alternative to your offering has been for them to do nothing 
but endure their situation. Systematically thinking through what the 
beneficiary needs to be able to do to experience the benefit of your 
solution can be mapped into a Beneficiary Experience table (see 
Table 4.1).
Table 4.1: Beneficiary Experience Table for Zambian Poultry Farmers
Hear about poultry-rearing program.
Decide to rear chickens.
Learn how to rear chickens.
Raise funds to start rearing.
Purchase feed.
Transport feed to poultry house. 
Store feed. 
Purchase chicks (third-party chick supplier needed).
Transport chicks to poultry house (possible third-party transportation needed).
Rear chickens:
 • Keep housing clean (biosecurity).
 • Vaccinate them (third-party veterinarian needed).
 • Keep them warm.
 • Water them.
 • Feed them.
Slaughter some fowls for home consumption.
Consume chicken.
Transport surplus chickens to market.
Sell chickens at market.
Manage income.Understand the Bene ficiary Experience      33
Beneficiary Experience: Ikotoilet 
For comparative purposes, let’s look at the simpler Beneficiary 
Experience table for Ecotact’s Ikotoilet, depicted in Table 4.2. 
  In Kuria’s case, this is a much simpler Beneficiary Experience 
table. The beneficiaries need to do little other than know about the 
facility, be convinced to use it, and then regularly use it. With this 
much simpler Beneficiary Experience table, of course, things were 
easier for Kuria than for Ilona, but even a simple table such as his 
can harbor problems. One would think that using a toilet would be 
quite simple. However, the early Ikotoilet design was challenged as 
inadequate for use by practicing Muslims, for its lack of a shower 
attachment or other device for post-use cleansing.
  With the Beneficiary Experience table fleshed out, it is time to 
talk to your advisory group and have them challenge your Beneficiary 
Experience table. Y ou should also seriously consider talking to a 
number of target beneficiaries to get their reaction to your idea of 
what the experience of your project needs to be for them to accept 
it—a step that the ill-fated condom programs should probably have 
undertaken.Table 4.2: Beneficiary Experience Table for Ikotoilet Users
Hear about Ikotoilet.
Decide to use facility.
Become aware of need.
Get to the facility.
Be instructed in use of facility.
Pay for use.
Use the facility. 
Habitually reuse facility.34     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
Chapter Checklist
Following the processes outlined in this chapter, you will have:
 m   Defined the requisite beneficiary experience and associated 
activities.
 m   Generated a Beneficiary Experience table, and had it accepted 
by your advisors and discussed with beneficiaries.
Tough Love Test
If you answer no to any of the following questions, you might want 
to rethink your idea. If you answer no twice, abandon your idea—
it simply won’t be worth your time and resources if you cannot 
surmount these challenges at this early stage. If you answer yes to all 
the following questions, by all means, continue exploring your idea.
 1.   Do your advisors agree that you deeply understand what the 
proposed beneficiaries are doing currently  to manage/endure 
their problem? 
 2.   Have the advisors signed off on your proposed Beneficiary 
Experience table?Analyze the Most Competitive 
Alternative
35CHAPTER 5
Having tried to understand what a beneficiary will need to 
experience, now ask yourself: What is the most competitive 
alternative already out there? That is, who currently offers the 
best alternative approach to the problem? Put differently, how do 
beneficiaries currently cope in the absence of your envisioned product 
or service? This chapter focuses on helping you think through the 
direct and indirect competition for your proposed solution and 
pinpoint whether your venture is sufficiently different from, and 
superior to, what is currently available. Are you attempting to deliver 
a substantively superior experience or something only incrementally 
different from an available alternative?
  In the case of Zambia Feeds, some farmers mixed their own 
feeds from locally sourced raw materials, which made them 
Ilona’s indirect competitors, even though they were also potential 
customers. The more extreme case was free-range chicken producers, 
who sporadically scattered corn grit but generally expected their 
chickens to forage for themselves, and who provided only a primitive 
protective enclosure for their chickens to take shelter and sleep, and 
who did not require a supply of “imported” chicks, leaving chick 
production to Mother Nature. 
  Another possible source of competition for an enterprise might 
be government or NGO programs that subsidize a product or service 
you intend to provide. In such cases, you may find it extremely difficult 
to compete with or “match” what in effect are indirect competitive 
solutions to your idea. Y ou may even have direct competitors already 36     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
providing a somewhat different offering. Such competition provides 
valuable benchmarking information such as price, product or 
service features, and distribution channels. It also offers a platform 
for questioning during research as you try to determine what about 
your envisioned offering would need to be different and/or superior 
in order for beneficiaries to support it. Do not lightly dismiss 
competition as not being present. As we have mentioned before, it 
may be that the beneficiaries’ current alternative is simply to endure 
their problem. This alternative, though it may be frustrating for you, 
is nonetheless competitive, and is frequently present for nutrition-, 
education-, and health-related deprivations. In fact, in some cases, 
beneficiaries’ fatalistically doing nothing  at all itself constitutes an 
entrenched competitive alternative that you may have to overcome.
  As you look at the most competitive alternative, if your solution 
appears to come up short against it, ask yourself if and how you can 
innovate  to provide a significantly superior offering. If you cannot, 
scrap the project—don’t squander scarce resources replicating what 
is already being done! Innovation can come in many forms, from 
innovation in delivery to innovation in payment systems. One of the 
most famous innovations in business dates back to 1856, when the 
Singer sewing machine company in New Y ork introduced the “hire-
purchase” plan, the prototype for all future installment loan plans, 
thereby forever enabling people of limited means to make purchases 
for which they do not have cash.14 The idea opened up an entire 
new market of low- and middle-income consumers, who would use 
money earned by sewing and selling garments to pay off their sewing 
machines, rather than paying up front in cash they did not have. 
  Nearly 150 years later, the largest cement manufacturer in Mexico, 
CEMEX, took similar steps, with similar success. During Mexico’s 
economic downturn in the mid-1990s, CEMEX saw a major drop 
in domestic sales. The formal segment (contractors and builders) 
dropped roughly 50%, while sales in the informal segment (do-it-Analyze the Most Competitive Alternative      37
yourselfers) dropped just 10% to 20%.15 Realizing it was missing out 
on a huge market—the informal market for cement has a potential 
for $400–$500 million annually16—CEMEX turned the existing 
cement-buying process on its head. The company experimented 
with a new program called Patrimonio Hoy (or “Y our Heritage 
Today”), giving the poor access to the materials they needed to build 
their houses. With this innovative project initiated in 1999, CEMEX 
opened a multitude of small kiosks throughout Mexico to be closer 
to its customers, using the opportunity to explain credit and building 
practices to them. It then helped local neighborhoods raise funds and 
provided them with a small team, including an architect, to facilitate 
construction. In return, the communities purchased cement from 
CEMEX to build their houses. The program was both philanthropic 
and profitable. By 2005, more than 100,000 houses had been built 
by and for low-income Mexican families, and CEMEX had received 
greater than $42 million in total sales.17 CEMEX now has similar 
programs generating homes self-built by the poor in more than a 
dozen developing countries.
  Both Singer and CEMEX innovated by having a beneficiary-
centric, instead of a product-centric, orientation. It is vital that you 
carefully consider what you propose doing from the perspective of 
the user, or beneficiary, you have in mind, and that you ask yourself, 
“Is what I am proposing truly  a superior and attractive alternative to 
the current situation?” If your answer is yes, then the sooner you are 
able to get concept validation from the intended beneficiaries, the 
better. If no, then either stop what you are doing or consider how you 
might transform the current situation into one with more compelling 
incentives for the intended beneficiaries. Should you wish to read 
examples of transformative moves made by firms across geographies 
and industries, we suggest you refer to the book MarketBusters ,18 by 
Rita McGrath and Ian MacMillan.38     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
Most Competitive Alternative: Zambia Feeds
As we showed in the Zambia Feeds case, Ilona’s seed customer 
segment comprised existing small-scale producers. The most 
competitive alternative for these small producers was for them to buy 
and mix their own (lower-quality) feed, using seasonally available 
raw materials, and to forgo the benefits of higher production yields 
(much-better-quality meat) and thus higher selling prices and 
therefore higher cash flows. We also showed that for the longer 
term , the highest potential lay in persuading village farmers to put 
together a small chicken coop (or to use a spare room under cover or 
an unused hut) and rear chickens as a profitable enterprise using the 
more productive Zambia Feeds product. 
  In the right-hand columns of Table 5.1 on pages 39-40, we have 
listed the advantages of farming using Zambia Feeds versus two 
existing competitive alternatives: the “seed segment” (existing small-
scale producers), some of whom are mixing their own feed; and 
the “longer-term” segment (villagers with “free-range” chickens). 
For the free-range villager segment, reality kicks in: It is clear that 
any farmers Ilona recruits are going to have to invest considerable 
effort and incur some expenses compared to simply having a flock of 
chickens running free and foraging around their village. For existing 
small producers mixing their own feed, the challenge is to convince 
them that Zambia Feeds will in fact deliver attractively higher cash 
flows stemming from faster and greater yields of better-quality meat. 
Most Competitive Alternative: Ikotoilet
Next let’s look at Ecotact’s Ikotoilet, as shown in Table 5.2 on page 
41, remembering that the seed target beneficiaries are members of 
the public frequenting the central business district without access 
to clean toilets. The longer-term major target segments are the local 
trading markets for goods and services, and eventually the residential 
estates/townships.Analyze the Most Competitive Alternative      39
  Advantages of existing Advantages of  
 Advantages of small producers (who villagers with small flock
Beneficiary Zambia Feeds already farm, mixing of free-ranging fowls
experience program own feed) foraging for themselves
Hear about program.
Decide to rear
poultry.
Learn how to rear Much better
poultry. meat quality
Raise funds to start.   No funding costs
Purchase feed. Much higher Disadvantage: has to  No funding costs
 quality premixed source ingredients
 feed and mix own feed
Transport feed to  Lower transport costs No transport costs
poultry house.  (some raw materials) 
Store feed.  Lower spoilage costs No spoilage costs
Purchase chicks.   No chick costs
Transport chicks
to poultry house.   No transport costs
Rear chickens. Much higher yield
Keep housing clean   No cleaning costs
(biosecurity).
Vaccinate them. Lower disease Lower disease No vaccination costs 
 losses losses
Keep them warm.  No fuel costs No fuel costs
Water them.  No water feeder costs No water feeder costs
Feed them.  Lower feed costs No feed costsTable 5.1: Beneficiary Experience Table for Small-Scale Zambian 
Poultry Farmers 
Table 5.1 continued on next page40     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
  Advantages of existing Advantages of  
 Advantages of small producers (who village with small flock
Beneficiary Zambia Feeds already farm, mixing of free-ranging fowls
Experience program own feed) foraging for themselves
Slaughter some   Cheaper to rear and
fowls for home    consume
consumption.
Consume chicken. More higher-
 quality meat 
 faster
Transport surplus   No transportation of
chickens to market.   chickens
Sell chickens at Much higher Some income Disadvantage: no
market. prices and greater  income from
 income  chickens  
Manage income.  Disadvantage: Disadvantage:
  less income less income
Note: For purposes of greater clarity, we occasionally insert a disadvantage of a 
competitive alternative versus the proposed offering by flagging it as a disadvantage 
and by entering this disadvantage in italics.Table 5.1: Beneficiary Experience Table for Small-Scale Zambian 
Poultry Farmers (Continued)
Is Y our Offering Competitive?
If what you propose to offer is not meaningfully superior, different, or 
attractive (after validation by your advisors), you need to reconsider 
your offering prior to attempting to launch. If we consider the 
Zambia Feeds Beneficiary Experience table, it is clear that two of the 
critical differences between the existing small producer alternative 
and Zambia Feeds’ proposed activities are the ability of the small-
scale farmer to generate larger quantities of higher-quality meat 
more quickly, and to extract a price premium and greater cash flows 
once the grown chickens have been sold at market. In order to enable 
this, Zambia Feeds needed to be sure it had the capabilities required 
to sell high-quality feed at a low enough price such that farmers Analyze the Most Competitive Alternative      41
  Central business Markets: Advantages  
  district: Advantages of open pit (or holding 
Beneficiary Advantages of of established  it in till finding a ditch
experience Ecotact’s Ikotoilet municipal toilet or bush)
Hear about. 
Ikotoilet. 
Decide to use
facility.
Become aware   Disadvantage:
of need.   prolonged discomfort
Get to facility.   Disadvantage: hard
   to find a suitable spot
Be instructed in use
of facility.
Pay for use.  No need to pay No need to pay
Use the facility. Avoid infection Disadvantage:  Disadvantage:
 and disease unsanitary and  often  no privacy; 
  does not work;  highly unsanitary
  dangerous
Habitually reuse Avoid infection Disadvantage:  Disadvantage:
facility. and disease exposure to disease  huge exposure to
   diseaseTable 5.2: Beneficiary Experience Table for Ikotoilet Users
could make a profit. The visible success of the program for the small-
scale producers could then be leveraged to convert some (hopefully 
many) free-range villagers into small-scale commercial producers. 
In the case of the village farmer-to-be converts, the advantage is the 
ability to generate meat for the family and cash for other expenses, 
but this must be offset by the extremely low cost of free-ranging, 
which involves zero investment.
  A second feature of the tables is that they highlight the behavior 
changes your target beneficiary would need to make in order to 
accept your product or service. Consider the HIV/AIDS-prevention 42     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
program we referred to in the previous chapter. It turns out that 
the program administrators, in many cases, focused on the proper 
use and handling of the condoms they were making available, but 
few tried to affect the highly entrenched behaviors and beliefs that 
made condoms an extremely unpopular choice among men. Not 
surprisingly, many of these programs have been colossal failures. 
  It is worth repeating that there is always  a competitive alternative, 
even if the alternative is merely to do nothing. 
  Now that you have further developed your insights into the 
beneficiary, you must consider whether you and your advisory 
group have sufficient expertise to evaluate your current position 
and assist in your next steps. We highly recommend that you use 
this opportunity to consult with your advisors in order to determine 
whether:
 •  They believe your solution is sufficiently superior to the most 
competitive alternative;
 •  They believe it possible for beneficiaries to secure or develop the 
necessary capabilities required to participate in your program; 
and
 •  They can direct you to other suitable advisors whom you might 
recruit to assist you with additional facets of your enterprise 
development.
  Members of your advisory group should play an active role in 
the development of your enterprise. The earlier you solicit their help, 
including in expanding the group itself, the better. 
  As important as their support is their identification of key risks 
within the environment early on and help in mitigating and/or 
overcoming those risks so as to prevent unnecessary barriers and 
time-consuming delays.
  A cautionary note here: It is in your best interest to listen to the 
advisors you have assembled, but this does not mean you have to 
blindly obey them. It is not uncommon for the first response to a Analyze the Most Competitive Alternative      43
new and innovative idea to be skepticism. However, there is nothing 
to stop you from pushing back if you feel you have a powerful 
counterargument; but you should pay attention to their concerns 
and be open to suggestions that will alleviate those concerns. This 
should be done in the spirit of constructive deliberation. Encourage 
anyone with serious doubts about an aspect of your enterprise to 
offer a constructive alternative, not just an objection.
Chapter Checklist
Following the processes outlined in this chapter, you will have:
 m   Developed a Beneficiary Experience table showing the advan-
tages and (in italics) the disadvantages of your enterprise versus 
the most competitive alternative for your target segments.
 m   Thought about how you will handle the disadvantages and ex-
ploit the advantages for your key segments.
 m   Confirmed with your advisors that the target beneficiaries can 
be coaxed into embracing your proposed solution and change 
their behavior to accommodate the solution you are proposing.
Tough Love Test
If you answer no to either of the following questions, you might 
want to rethink your idea. If you answer yes to both questions, by all 
means, continue exploring your idea.
 1.   Are you and your advisory group confident that you have a 
plausible and attractive proposition to outperform the most 
competitive alternative in the key segments you have targeted? 
(Outperforming means doing meaningfully better than the 
most competitive alternative in the eyes of the beneficiary . If you 
can’t do better than replicate the beneficiary’s most competitive 
alternative experience, your duplication will simply waste 
valuable resources.)44     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
 2.   Can you overcome the disadvantages you have in comparison 
with the most competitive alternatives for your target seg-
ments? Can you clearly articulate how you will do this? If not, 
you should forget about those segments.Identify Operations Realities
45CHAPTER 6
Knowing what the competition has to offer now sets you up for 
the tough job of thinking through what you will have to be able 
to do, not just say, in order for your program to work. In this chapter, 
we look at what your enterprise needs to be able to do to make sure 
the beneficiary experience is actually delivered. What skills, systems, 
assets, and other resources will you need to deploy to make the 
whole thing work? 
  We meet with many well-intentioned social entrepreneurs who 
have great ideas but who have not thought through all they will 
be required to do to make their ventures work. It is here that you 
first begin to boil your concept down to the practicalities of daily 
operations. 
  As a first step, you should develop a Deliverables table to outline 
all the capabilities you will need to have in place so that the benefit 
can be delivered. Think through the important steps you will need 
to take for your venture to deliver the required activities. Start off  
with the steps you outlined in your Beneficiary Experience table 
in chapter 4 and then lay out all the major steps your project must 
execute for the whole system to work. Avoid getting lost in too much 
detail in the early stages; you will revisit and revise your tables and 
steps more than once as the project unfolds. If you have more than 
10 major steps, unless you have a really complicated project, you 
may be getting lost in unnecessary detail.
  Let’s return to the Zambia Feeds case. It would have been no 
good for Ilona just to assume that systems were in place to make 
happen what needed to happen, where and when she needed it to 46     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
happen, to make her feeds business operate smoothly. She had to 
think through every step of the process:
 •  Raw materials will not magically appear on the doorstep; they 
will have to be purchased, transported, and stored for use when 
needed. 
 •  Those raw materials then need to be mixed; the mixing plant 
needs to be purchased, maintained, and repaired; and spare 
parts need to be available. 
 •  Materials and equipment can be stolen unless secured. 
 •  The bagged feed mix will not move miraculously from her plant 
to farmers’ doorsteps; it will have to be transported to a place 
where the farmers can buy it. 
 •  The farmers need to be sure the feed is there when they need it, 
or their chickens will die. 
  Note: Y ou simply cannot afford to do a cursory job. There are too 
many things that can and, more often than not, will go wrong. 
  So think through what Ilona must do to make sure the 
beneficiaries can actually experience the items in her Beneficiary 
Experience table. Before Ilona can have feed available for farmers to 
buy, she has to follow these steps: 
 •  Buy bags and raw materials, then
 •  Transport the bags and raw materials to the mixing plant, then
 •  Store the bags and raw materials, then
 •  Mix the feed, then
 •  Bag the mix, then
 •  Store the mixed feed, then 
 •  Transport the feed to distribution centers accessible to farmers.
  Once you have thought through all the steps needed to deliver 
the business, put them into a Deliverables table. Table 6.1, for 
Zambia Feeds, lists all the major activities needed for Ilona to be Identify Operations Realities      47
Table 6.1: Deliverables Table for Zambia Feeds
Recruit and hire labor.
Buy bags and raw materials.
Store bags and raw materials.
Mix the feed.
Bag the mix.
Store the mixed feed.
Transport the feed to the distribution center.
Transport bags and raw materials to mixing plant.
Store the feed at distribution center.
able to deliver the benefits she had in mind. (This is why we call them 
“deliverables. ”)
  In the case of Zambia Feeds, other, less obvious issues were 
lurking: If a would-be farmer wanted to start raising chickens, where 
would she get the chicks? Simply assuming that day-old chicks would 
be there when needed was not an option. Knowing that they would 
need to be vaccinated to prevent potentially devastating disease 
outbreaks was critical. Ilona realized that it was up to  her to arrange 
for a supply of chicks and vaccines to be available when farmers 
came to buy feed. Hence, three more steps in her Deliverables table:
  Note: Y our tables will evolve as you learn what is required in the 
field. For the sake of simplicity, this is not included in the tables just 
given. Y ou will need to be vigilant about updating your tables and 
the associated financial plans you develop (chapter 9).Arrange supplier of chicks for distributors.
Arrange chick delivery to distributors.
Arrange vaccines/vaccination services.48     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
  For comparative purposes, let’s look at the Ikotoilet case (Table 
6.2) and see what the entrepreneur needed to have in place for each 
of his Ikotoilets to work.
  This is a good time, once again, to consult with people in the  
know. Armed with the Beneficiary Experience and Deliverables 
tables, which have the power of being very easy to explain, seek the 
input of your advisory group. And remember to challenge them not 
just to raise concerns and objections, but also to give advice on how 
to circumvent the problems they raise.
Identify Y our Necessary Capabilities 
The activities outlined in the Deliverables table will require that you 
either possess or have ready access to specific capabilitie s. Identifying 
those capabilities is important for two reasons. First, you need to 
be confident that you have or can get the skills needed. Second, 
capabilities are a key contributor to costs you are likely to incur. 
  In the spirit of learning ahead of major investment, we capture 
this information by mapping key capabilities into rows in the 
Deliverables table. This is an important step. The careful articulation Table 6.2: Deliverables Table for Ikotoilet
Secure site property and permits.
Excavate and build facility.
Ensure water and electricity supply.
Build and operate Ikotoilet facility.
Instruct users.
Receive and secure payments from users.
Arrange property guards.
Manage waste recovery conversion to fertilizer.
Sell waste recovery by-products as fertilizer.Identify Operations Realities      49
of the skills needed for operations reveals another hard reality 
of distressed environments: staffing can be a major problem, 
particularly recruitment, training, and retention of staff conversant 
in local conditions. 
  Lack of attention to the capability requirements has doomed 
many a well-meaning enterprise. In fact, we were speaking recently 
with a consultant to a social entrepreneur  in India who told us that 
“you have to think about the last ten miles, then the last mile, then 
even the last ten yards of a delivery. ”19 Why? Because myriad problems 
might occur, including local power failures and lack of emergency 
power. One social entrepreneurship project in India almost col-
lapsed because the perishable vaccine that the entrepreneur was 
distributing could not be kept safely and reliably refrigerated due 
to the unreliability of kerosene supplies for the refrigerators used to 
store it.
  In another example, this one from Africa, a well-meaning 
nonprofit undertook a reforestation project for which funding was 
raised, managers hired, nursery space procured, and tree seedlings 
grown. By the time the nonprofit was ready to plant the seedlings in 
the area designated for reforestation, however, the rainy season had 
begun. The rain and mud made it impossible to access and work 
the reforestation area for three months. Thousands of seedlings 
continued to grow in the rain—in makeshift locations frantically 
and very expensively secured after the completely disrupted planting 
schedule. (Locals, who had not been consulted, were hugely amused 
that the reforesters were ignorant of the seasonal storms.) 
  The following Deliverables tables for Zambia Feeds (Table 6.3)  
and Ikotoilet (Table 6.4) were created earlier in the chapter, but now 
include a new column listing the capabilities needed to achieve the 
deliverables. If you do not possess your required capabilities, or 
know of any way of reliably procuring them (through consultants, 
outsourcing, or hiring staff), then you may want to think hard about 
pursuing your venture.50     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
Zambia Feeds deliverables Capabilities needed  
Arrange for supplier of chicks. Identification of and negotiation with supplier 
Arrange chick delivery to distributors. Identification of and negotiation with supplier
Arrange vaccines/vaccination services. Identification of and negotiation with 
 veterinarians
Recruit farmers. Marketing and selection skills
Train recruited farmers. Training skills and chicken-rearing knowledge
Buy bags and raw materials. Purchasing skills
Transport the bags and raw materials to plant. Logistics
 
Store bags and raw materials. Inventory management 
Mix feed. Superior formulation capabilities 
 Equipment repair skills 
Bag mix. Inventory management 
Store mixed feed. Inventory management 
Transport bags of feed to distribution center. Logistics 
Store feed at distribution center. Inventory managementTable 6.3: Deliverables Table with Required Capabilities for 
Zambia Feeds 
  Ecotact founder Kuria needed very different, more political, 
regulatory and construction capabilities to build his multi-location 
sanitation program, as shown in Table 6.4. The point is that unless 
you really think through the skills that need to be done well to launch 
and execute the entire Deliverables table, you will find yourself short 
of skills at a critical, often fatal, juncture as your program unfolds.Identify Operations Realities      51
Ecotact deliverables Capabilities needed  
Secure property and permits. Municipal dealings/relations
Excavate and build facility. Construction engineering
Ensure water supply. Civil and chemical engineering 
 Construction engineering
Build and operate Ikotoilet facility. Construction engineering
 Sewage treatment
Instruct users. Instruction
Receive payments. Cash management 
Manage waste recovery. Waste treatment and recovery
Sell waste recovery by-products as fertilizer. Industrial sellingTable 6.4: Deliverables Table with Required Capabilities for Ikotoilet
Identify Beneficiaries’ Necessary Capabilities 
Y ou also need to consider the capabilities and skills your beneficiaries 
must have in place in order to make your program work. To do this, 
go back to the Beneficiary Experience table from chapter 4 and 
identify the capabilities your beneficiaries need and whether they 
have them.
  Let’s return to the Zambia Feeds example and consider the 
activities a farmer-to-be in the village needs to execute well if her 
chicken farming is to succeed. See Table 6.5 on the following page.
  Now that you have considered the capabilities required by your 
beneficiaries, revisit the alternatives they have. Think deeply, and 
candidly, about how superior your proposal truly is relative to the 
beneficiaries’ most competitive alternative. Then consider the effort 
and capabilities required for the adoption of your offer relative to 
that alternative. 
  Think also about how your beneficiaries are going to acquire the 
needed skills. In many cases, the development of these skills may 52     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
Table 6.5: Beneficiary Experience Table with Required Capabilities for 
Zambian Poultry Farmers
Beneficiary experience Capabilities/skills for small producers
Hear about program.  
Decide to rear poultry. 
Learn how to rear poultry. Educational seminars
Raise funds to start. Loan procurement
Purchase feed. 
Transport feed to poultry house.  Transportation
Store feed.  Storage
Purchase chicks.  Ordering and payment
Transport chicks to poultry house. Transportation
Rear chickens: 
 • Keep housing clean (biosecurity). Hygiene/cleaning
 • Vaccinate them. Drug dispensing, disease management
 • Keep them warm. Temperature management
 • Water them. Clean water delivery
 • Feed them. Feed delivery
Slaughter some fowls for home consumption. Hygiene, poultry processing
Consume chicken. 
Transport surplus chickens to market. Transportation
Sell chickens at market.  Sales, cash management
  
Manage income.
well end up as your responsibility, which could add considerably to 
your cost. However, without those skills, the beneficiaries will not 
benefit—and in turn, neither will you.Identify Operations Realities      53
Identify Y our Costs
In your Deliverables table, you listed all the steps necessary for you 
to be able to deliver a unit of social impact to your beneficiaries, 
as well as the capabilities needed to take those steps. Most of those 
capabilities, however, will most likely incur costs. So your next task 
is to begin carefully thinking about the resources you will need to 
accomplish each step in your table. 
  In Table 6.6, on the following page, we have expanded the 
number of columns of the original Deliverables table for Zambia 
Feeds to reflect the kinds of materials, staff, and equipment the 
venture will need to create and operate the feed plant. Note that,  
at this stage, we are not estimating the values  for the actual costs; 
we are simply making sure we have identified, flagged, and listed 
the types  of resources needed, so as not to neglect costs that will be 
important later.
Determine Y our Funding Sources
Once your other tables are completed, we are going to hit you with 
yet one more! Our apologies, but this table is crucial: it identifies the 
sources of the funds needed to support operation of your program.
In the Zambia Feeds case, Ilona decided that most of the funds 
would be generated through sales of 25 kg bags of chicken feed. But 
she also decided that funding for her equipment would come from 
investment from the Zambia Feeds parent company and funding for 
inventories from bank loans.
  This leads to a simple Funding table (Table 6.7 on page 55). 
Note that, again, we are not yet quantifying the amounts  needed, 
just identifying the types  of funding sources to be pursued. The task 
is to review the Deliverables tables to identify all the places where 
funding will be required, and in the Funding table, to specify how 
you think the items should be funded.54     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
Table 6.6: Deliverables Table with Types of Costs for Zambia Feeds
Cost types  Equipment  Staff  Materials
From Beneficiary Experience  Manager of feeds 
table: Arrange for supplier   company
of chicks.
From Beneficiary Experience   Manager of feeds
table: Arrange chick delivery   company
to distributors.
From Beneficiary Experience   Manager of feeds   
table: Arrange vaccines/  company
vaccination services.
Recruit farmers.  Representatives of 
  feeds company
Train recruited farmers.  Trainers Printed materials
Buy bags and raw materials.  Manager of feeds Raw materials
  company
Transport bags and raw  Trucks Drivers
materials to plant.
Store bags and raw materials. Warehouse, inventory Guards 
 management system
Mix and bag feed. Mixing plant, Mixers, baggers Power for machinery
 bagging plant
Store mixed feed. Warehouse, inventory Guards 
 management system
Transport bags of feed to Truck Drivers Fuel
distribution center.
Store feed at distribution  Managers/money Feed inventory
center.  handlers, guards  Identify Operations Realities      55
Table 6.7: Funding Table for Zambia Feeds 
Table 6.8: Funding Table for a Nonprofit 
Funding need areas Source of funding  
Operations Charitable donations
Equipment Foundation grants
Land and buildings Local banks In nonprofits the sources of revenues can be more complex, such 
as grants from governments or foundations, donations from the 
public, or a combination of these. An example of such a Funding 
table is Table 6.8.
Chapter Checklist
Following the processes outlined in this chapter, you will have:
 m   Revisited your Beneficiary Experience table and identified 
all the activities your enterprise must deliver to ensure that 
your beneficiaries actually experience what you propose and 
that what you propose is superior to the most competitive 
alternative. This is captured in your Deliverables table. 
 m   Identified all the capabilities your enterprise will need in order 
to execute your solution.
 m   Started planning how you are going to develop or secure need-
ed capabilities.
 m   Revisited your Beneficiary Experience table and, in a separate 
column, identified all the capabilities your beneficiaries need 
in order to experience the benefits you envisage, and which 
capabilities they do not have.Funding need areas Source of funding  
Operations Revenues from feed sales
Equipment Parent company investment
Inventory Local banks56     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
 m   Started planning how you are going to develop or secure the 
capabilities your beneficiaries lack. 
 m   Identified the types of costs you will incur to deliver yours and 
your beneficiaries’ capabilities.
 m   Determined your funding sources and noted them in the 
Funding table.
Tough Love Test
If you answer no to any of the following questions, you might want 
to rethink your idea. If you answer no more than twice, abandon 
your idea—it simply won’t be worth your time and resources if you 
cannot surmount these challenges at this early stage. If you answer 
yes to all the following questions, by all means, continue exploring 
your idea.
 1.   Have you clearly identified all the activities your enterprise 
needs to be able to realize the items listed in your Beneficiary 
Experience table? 
 2.   Are you confident you can secure access to the capabilities  
you will need? This would include resources that might 
normally be readily available in developed countries/situations, 
such as power, transportation, skills, equipment repair and 
maintenance, and accounting and recordkeeping.
 3.   Have you identified the gaps between the skills and resources 
the beneficiaries have and those they need in order to 
experience the benefits you propose to deliver?
 4.   Are you confident that there are ways to close those gaps? 
 5.   Have you identified your potential costs? Are you certain you 
have or can secure the resources to meet those costs?
 6.   Have you determined your funding sources? Are those sources 
reliable and secure?57CHAPTER 7
Address the Inevitable 
Sociopolitics
In 2002, Jaytee,20 a technology entrepreneur, approached us about 
developing and introducing a new electronic medical decision-
making methodology to significantly enhance medical services in 
countries facing severe HIV/AIDS patient care challenges. Jaytee, 
who was well connected to the medical, veterinary, and business 
school community in the United States, had researched several 
potential African nations and used his list of project-specific 
attractiveness features to decide where to launch his enterprise, and 
eventually settled on a country. 
  The government in that country was actively concerned with 
improving the health of its citizens. Over the prior 20 years, the 
country had been ravaged by HIV/AIDS, which had severely 
debilitated the economy’s working population of 18- to 50-year-
olds and put a massive strain on the health care system. Jaytee’s idea 
was first to computerize all medical records (then in paper form) 
and eventually to build an expert system that would enable suitably 
trained nurses to do HIV/AIDS diagnostic and prescription work, 
which was then handled by the country’s limited pool of highly 
overloaded doctors. The system, which we shall call AidsAid, would 
include such activities as diagnosis, first-line therapy prescription 
decision support, laboratory report follow-up, and patient record 
management. Jaytee planned to sell the software system to hospitals 
through government contracts, eventually throughout Africa and 
later globally. He saw many positives in the idea: by putting many 58     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
tasks in the hands of nurses, the AidsAid system would significantly 
increase the efficiency of day-to-day patient care, thus freeing up 
doctors to focus on the sickest, neediest patients, and ideally resulting 
in lowered costs for the hospital and better care for patients. To 
anyone looking from the outside, it seemed like a win-win-win.
  Therefore, Jaytee was shaken at the manifold negative responses 
to his proposed idea. Reactions from people in the health 
department, in local hospitals, and in public clinics ranged from 
complete indifference to outright hostility. Then he learned that two 
years before, a well-established local subsidiary of a multinational 
software and consulting firm had sold a full-service health care 
management system to the country’s health department. The system 
had then been force-launched in a number of public hospitals and 
clinics, at great expense, and was simply not working as hoped. The 
post-installation challenges caused major disruptions in health care 
delivery, thereby creating a highly dissatisfied set of stakeholders, 
who were disillusioned and disgruntled. Fortunately, this system had 
not been imposed on the private clinics in the country, including the 
largest one, located in the capital city. The management and staff of this 
large private clinic were therefore not frustrated by implementation 
failures. However, they were deeply and understandably circumspect 
about the plausibility of any electronic system, given the woes 
they had observed in their public clinic counterparts. Jaytee also 
experienced resistance from the country’s major medical analysis 
laboratory, which was responsible for the analysis and transmission 
of all medical tests done for HIV/AIDS patients. Its transmission 
system was a manual (paper and CD) one, and conversion to an 
electronic system would have required significant effort on the  
lab’s part, something its management was not yet ready to undertake, 
since it was comfortable with a manual system that was working well.Address the Inevitable Sociopolitics      59
The Challenge of Analyzing the Sociopolitical 
Landscape
In the introduction, we talked about the high uncertainty that 
social entrepreneurs typically face: imperfect markets, uncertain 
prices, lack of consistently administered (predictable) governance, 
unreliable infrastructure, untested technology, and unpredictable 
competitive responses. In particular, the absence of consistently 
administered, predictable governance often makes for an extremely 
punishing environment in which to work. Y ou might, for example, 
complete all the appropriate application forms to receive a permit to 
start a business or enlarge a building, only to be told no by the local 
authorities, with no explanation as to why. 
  These kinds of bureaucratic headaches happen in every country. 
However, the minimally resourced social enterprise is more vulner-
able to such obstacles, particularly if the start-up disrupts the status 
quo, and must then defend itself against resistance by entrenched 
interests. Every one of our projects has been hampered by one or 
more instances of official inertia, lack of support, bureaucratic foot-
dragging, or even outright corruption. In one case, an entrepreneur 
we were working with attempted to meet a senior government 
member on six occasions over as many months, only to have every 
confirmed meeting postponed at the last minute. Whether this 
was due to corruption or simply incompetence, we never found 
out, but the delays seriously compromised and almost destroyed 
the initiative. In Jaytee’s case, he was initially almost derailed by 
unexpected negative feedback from key stakeholders.
A Three-Step Approach to Addressing Sociopolitics
Poor political savvy has destroyed many a well-intentioned enter-
prise. Analyzing sociopolitics is challenging. Y ou need to use  
a lot of judgment when developing a sociopolitical strategy, but doing 
so is mission-critical. We recommend the following approach: 60     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
 1.  Identify stakeholders. 
 2.   Categorize your stakeholders: allies, opponents, and needed 
indifferents.
 3.  Develop a sociopolitical strategy.
  Each project’s challenges, and of course yours, will be unique. 
For instance, you might very much want to block an opponent but 
simply do not have the wherewithal to do so. Or you might want  
to mobilize a potential supporter but are not able to generate 
interest on their part. Unfair as this may seem, our response to such 
difficulties is to say, somewhat callously, “Life’s unfair. Either find 
another way or stop fruitlessly wasting time and resources. ”
Identify Stakeholders
To begin the process, start by thinking through all the people and 
organizations that will be impacted by the success of your venture. 
Think about parties that will benefit. Think about parties that will 
experience negative impacts or be inconvenienced. Think about all 
the parties whose support will be needed. Then think about each 
party’s possible reaction, so you can prepare for the inevitable 
sociopolitics.
  Think of how stakeholders may be affected both negatively and 
positively. In the real world, there are often cases where stakeholders 
are conflicted, perceiving both benefits and annoyances from what 
you are doing. 
  Y ou will want to capture your thoughts in a Stakeholder Impact 
table, which will allow you to list the stakeholder, anticipated negative 
impacts, and anticipated positive impacts. For each impact, note if it 
is short, medium, and/or long term.
  To show how this might look for Jaytee’s AidsAid project, see  
Table 7.1.Address the Inevitable Sociopolitics      61
Table 7.1: Stakeholder Impact Table for AidsAid 
Stakeholder Major negative impact (if any) Major positive impact (if any)
Health department  Short term:  Large potential  Long term: Major increase in
 write-off of existing program;  patient treatment efficacy
 egg on face
Hospital administrator of  Short term: Installation Medium term:  Major reduction 
major private clinic difficulties with new electronic in workload and increase in
 (in place of paper) system medical services
Multinational medical  Short term:  Potential loss of Long term: Possible licensing
software firm business and reputation opportunity with new technology
Doctors Short, medium, long term:   Long term: More patients
 Perceived erosion of influence  handled much more efficiently
 and value of expertise; perceived 
 loss of income (private sector)
Nurses Short, medium, long term:  Medium, long term: Hugely
 Additional responsibilities increased efficacy
HIV/AIDS patient Short term:  Perceived risk of  Medium and long term: 
 “lower expertise” when being  Increased vitality; potentially
 treated by a nurse versus a doctor longer lifespan, with more time
  to work and make money
Medical analysis laboratory Short term:  Inability to handle  Medium and long term: 
 lab reporting using electronic  Much more efficient and
 records accurate record management
  and transfer
  Notice in Table 7.1 that many of the AidsAid stakeholders may be 
affected both negatively and positively and that the negative effects 
happen in the short term and that the positive benefits may emerge 
only after a delay. This is not atypical. Handling this combination of 
short-term negatives before longer-term positive effects is difficult, 
but it is further reason to make your table comprehensive.
  When you create your own sociopolitical strategy, be aware 
that your Stakeholder Impact table will evolve over time and will 
need to be regularly updated as you learn and as stakeholders in the 
environment begin to hear about, and respond to, your plans.62     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
  A good time to revisit your Stakeholder Impact table is when 
you hit a key checkpoint in your Discovery-Driven Plan, which will 
be discussed in chapter 11. It is also worth noting that in the mind 
of stakeholders, particularly those who feel threatened, there is little 
difference between perceived and real impact. Until such time as an 
incorrect perception is remedied, you must expect the stakeholders 
to react and respond to their  perception of reality. 
  If completed comprehensively, your Stakeholder Impact table 
will be a valuable tool for your advisory group members when 
you discuss your planned activities with them. Bear in mind that 
your advisory group can be an outstanding sounding board for 
getting ideas and insights about the reactions of stakeholders as you 
undertake this rather challenging, perhaps intimidating exercise. If 
you have chosen them well, the people in the know on your advisory 
group are the best sources of sociopolitical insight for your specific 
context. It is critical to engage them early to help you think through 
the execution of your enterprise.
Categorize Y our Stakeholders
The next step in the process is to review your Stakeholder Impact 
table and begin to categorize your stakeholders. Through our 
experiences in the field, we identified three important categories of 
stakeholders that could affect the success of your program:
 • Potential allies
 • Primary opponents
 • Needed indifferents
Potential Allies
Potential allies are those who will benefit from and may be willing to 
commit support to your project. These people might be transactional 
partners (such as suppliers and distributors); leaders in commerce; 
members of local or national government; NGOs and not-for-Address the Inevitable Sociopolitics      63
profits; well-wishers; employees of regulatory or commerce bodies; 
or local dignitaries, such as tribal chiefs, local healers, or village 
elders. Among potential allies, you need to identify those who have 
meaningful  influence in the market/environment of your project, 
and think about how to mobilize them, since often they will be the 
ones you’ll most need to help you cope with opposition.
Primary Opponents
Primary opponents are those who will be adversely affected or greatly 
inconvenienced by your project’s success and who also have the 
wherewithal to resist or delay its execution. Primary opponents who 
have meaningful power and influence must be identified as early as 
possible so you can prepare to deal with their concerns and reactions.
Needed Indifferents
These are people or parties who are indifferent to your project’s 
success but whose support, effort, or resources may be necessary, such 
as government officials responsible for the issuance of permissions, 
licenses, and certificates. An official responsible for the issue of a 
license, which legally permits you to operate your enterprise, may 
have little knowledge of or interest in your beneficiaries or the 
purpose of your project. Another example of needed indifferents 
are suppliers and/or distributors who do not see support of your 
program as particularly beneficial to them financially. Their supplies 
may be critical to your operations, but the supplier or distributor 
may see you as “small potatoes, ” not worth the bother of timely 
support when supplies are short.
  As you begin to categorize your stakeholders, beware of overkill: 
It is easy to spend an inordinate amount of time generating long lists 
of stakeholders whose actions are unlikely to have a major impact 
on your success. Confine your list to no more than eight of the 
most important stakeholders. If you can’t handle the top ei ght, your 
project is doomed anyway.64     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
  A s you saw in Table 7.1, there is a time dynamic at work. In 
the beginning, few of the stakeholders will be active—after all, you 
probably have not started your project yet. Still, we have found it 
helpful to distinguish between players who very rapidly will become  
active and those who may join the fray later. For simplicity, we distin-
guish between those stakeholders who are: (i) active or soon to be active 
when your embryonic program is just starting and is highly (perhaps 
most) vulnerable; and (ii) inactive and whose active involvement with 
your enterprise or other stakeholders may be delayed.
  At the start, when you are undecided about the category in which 
to put a specific stakeholder, the fail-safe approach is as follows:
 •  When uncertain about whether to expect initial opposition, 
indifference, or support from a specific stakeholder, strategize 
as if you will experience some initial opposition. In that way, 
you are not disappointed by lack of support or blindsided by 
unanticipated opposition. 
 •  When uncertain about whether to expect a rapid or delayed 
response from primary opponents, strategize as if you expect a 
rapid response, so you are not caught napping.
 •  When uncertain about whether to expect early or delayed sup-
port from potential allies or indifferents, strategize as if you ex-
pect delays, so you are not surprised by a delay or lack of support. 
By using these fail-safe approaches, you minimize the damage you 
suffer if you are wrong.
  Returning to the AidsAid example, the following Stakeholder 
Mapping table shows the allies, opponents, and needed indifferents 
categorized by whether they are active or inactive. Jaytee needed 
to think about how much power and influence each particular 
stakeholder had to advance or retard his program; clearly, he needed 
to be more concerned with groups that had clout than those that  
did not. 
  As with the Stakeholder Impact table, the Stakeholder Mapping 
table should be updated frequently as your project takes hold. Address the Inevitable Sociopolitics      65
Table 7.2: Stakeholder Mapping Table for AidsAid
Status  Allies Opponents Indifferents
 Active allies to be Primary opponents Needed indifferents
 deployed to disrupt or  to convert
   accommodate
Currently active    Health department Medical analysis
(or soon to be    officials who  laboratory
be active)    imposed failed
   electronic system
 Potential allies to Potential opponents to  Indifferents to
 mobilize disrupt or accommodate convert
Currently inactive 1. Private clinic CEO 1. Some health 1. Public clinics and 
 2. Private clinic doctors,   department officials  their administrators
  nurses  2. Public clinics and   not disrupted by
    their administrators  earlier system failure 
    disrupted by weak  2. Doctor community
    performance of  3. Nurse community
    earlier system 4. HIV/AIDS patients
Stakeholders will shift positions, and new stakeholders may enter 
and ex it over time. In the beginning, many groups will fall in the 
inactive category, but once a business venture begins, some or all 
stakeholders will become active fairly quickly. (Remember, hornets 
don’t swarm until something disrupts their nest.) 
  Using Table 7.2, Jaytee is in a position to begin developing a 
sociopolitical strategy. Let’s consider how to go about building such 
a strategy using a set of specific tactics.
Develop a Sociopolitical Strategy
The next step is to develop a strategy for mobilizing allies, managing 
opponents, and converting those who are indifferent. Y ou will need 
to determine if you have the capabilities to influence these groups, 
whether by mobilizing allies, energizing indifferents, and especially 
end-running or blocking opponents. If the answer is that you have no 
way of coping with the reactions of these stakeholders, particularly 66     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
opponents, it’s a pretty good sign that your enterprise will not be 
viable—at least not in your desired location at this time. Indeed, 
we learned to our regret in two Wharton Social Entrepreneur-  
ship Program projects that failing to plan for these stakeholders 
leads to significant waste of time, resources, and effort.
  To develop an effective sociopolitical strategy, begin by method-
ically thinking through possible tactics for each major stakeholder, 
following one or more of the six tactical approaches listed here:
 • Specify the response you need from a given stakeholder. 
 •  Identify major current issues occupying that stakeholder’s 
attention.
 •  Deploy yours or an ally’s strategic knowledge, skills, or capa-
bilities germane to the stakeholder.
 •  Deploy yours or an ally’s physical and financial resources 
germane to the stakeholder.
 •  Deploy your network connections or expanded network 
connections.
 •  In the case of opponents, find a “safe haven” where you can 
establish a protected position without provoking immediate 
hostile opposition.
Specify the response you need. 
The response you need is what you hope to accomplish with a given 
stakeholder. It can range from an opponent agreeing to leave you 
be, through an indifferent agreeing to support you, through an ally 
committing support or giving you access to their networks in order 
to cope with other stakeholders.
Identify major current issues occupying stakeholder’s attention.
One key to a sociopolitical strategy is to obtain deep insight into what 
issues are of greatest concern to the target stakeholder. Such issues 
are no t always obvious, and may be unrelated to what you are trying 
to achieve, but it is vital  that you understand the broader context Address the Inevitable Sociopolitics      67
of the environment in which you hope to operate. Remember, it is 
easier for a busy stakeholder simply to say no than to find time and/
or a reason to say yes. Set aside thinking about what matters to you 
and identify the major issues salient to each of your stakeholders, 
what matters most to them and what is the full context shaping their 
actions and attitudes. It helps to determine which of your actions 
they will be most sensitive and reactive to. This will help you better 
understand the basis of stakeholder opposition, stakeholder support, 
or stakeholder indifference.
  By the way, do not fall into the trap of thinking that because you 
understand them, and they you, that you necessarily agree with one 
another. Many people foolishly think, “If only they understood me, 
they would agree with me. ” Not true—someone can fully understand 
you and still disagree with you.
  Y ou may well find that stakeholders are more concerned with 
other issues more pressing to them than those addressed by your 
project. This could have a possible double benefit for you. First, 
potential opponents may be distracted from attending to your actions 
while they wrestle with the issues more salient to them. Second, by 
helping potential allies or needed indifferents with their key issues, 
you may be able to influence their attitude and behavior with respect 
to your project.
Deploy strategic knowledge, skills, or capabilities germane to the 
stakeholder.
See if you have, or can gather, strategic information, or deploy your 
knowledge or capabilities, to influence the stakeholder. Once you 
have identified what you consider to be the stakeholder’s major 
issues, use your access to knowledge to do the following:
 •  For allies: Provide them with knowledge or skills or capabilities 
that will help them resolve their issues, thus earning influence to 
extract the ally’s support where needed, including access to the 
ally’s allies.68     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
 •  For opponents:  Use your access to knowledge or problem-
solving skills to help the opponent on an issue, thus generating 
influence with them. 
 •  For indifferents: Use your access to knowledge, capabilities, or 
problem-solving skills to improve the indifferent’s position on 
issues pressing to them, in exchange for support you need from 
them on your enterprise.
  Y ou might be able to “horse-trade” with opponents; in other 
words, provide help or access to solutions to their pressing issues 
in exchange for concessions on their opposition to your business. 
Or, more manipulatively (and rarely), you may be able to use your 
capabilities to aggravate an opponent’s position or obstruct the 
resolution of their issue if they do not provide you with support.
Deploy physical and financial resources germane to the stakeholder.
Think about any physical and financial resources you control (such 
as property, equipment, funds, and materials) to see if any can be 
deployed to reward allies and needed indifferents for their support, 
or opponents for cessation of opposition.
Deploy network connections.
Can you perhaps widen your perspective, looking at your network of 
contacts and explore opportunities? 
 •  For allies who cannot help you:  Get access to their allies, who 
may be able to help you with opponents and indifferents.
 •  For opponents: Use your allies or your allies’ allies to neutralize 
opponents by exposing them, discrediting their argument, 
marginalizing them, or further compromising their position. 
Failing this, find a place where the ally can heat-shield you from 
the opponent.
 •  For indifferents: Get allies to motivate the indifferents’ support.Address the Inevitable Sociopolitics      69
Create a “safe haven. ”
In the face of very powerful opponents, unless there is some way 
of using more powerful allies to control them, you may have to 
accommodate them, and not be allowed to build your program as 
quickly and/or as widely as you wish. This is the pragmatism of 
politics. Instead of trying to accomplish your final purpose broadly 
and quickly, you may have to console yourself with identifying  
and establishing yourself in a safe haven, a protected niche position 
where you can get your venture going without being subjected to 
immediate hostile opposition. This might be a geographic location, 
such as a part of the country where the opponent has less sway; or 
among a subpopulation of beneficiaries whom the opponent cannot 
access; or with particular organizations over which the opposition 
has no influence—in fact, any subset of the total domain. The idea 
is to use the safe haven as the starting point from which you will be 
able to grow over time. This requires that you recognize that you 
may have to postpone your full impact on the population of target 
beneficiaries. From your safe haven, isolated from interference, you 
can build “within-haven” beneficiary support that you can use later 
on expansion into other regions.
Bring It All Together to Create Tactics
The next step is to create a Tactics table for each stakeholder. 
Drawing on your Stakeholder Mapping table, start with your most 
powerful opponents, those who have the clout to block you or slow 
you down considerably via overt or passive resistance. If you cannot 
handle these opponents, your project is probably doomed anyway. 
Y our Tactics table for each stakeholder should address one or more 
of the six tactical approaches we have just discussed:
 •  Specify the response you want from the stakeholder.
 •  Identify major current issues occupying the stakeholder’s 
attention. 70     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
 •  Deploy your knowledge and skills to solve the stakeholder’s 
problem or use your knowledge and skills to secure the desired 
response.
 •  Deploy your physical and financial resources to reward or 
aggravate the stakeholder’s position.
 •  Deploy your network or expanded network connections to 
neutralize opponents, get access to an ally’s allies, or mobilize 
indifferents. 
 •  With opponents, if all else fails, can you find a safe haven away 
from direct opponent retaliation?
  To illustrate this, Table 7.3 shows the process Jaytee went through 
with the key opponent to his AidsAid project, the government health 
department.
  As a result of this analysis, Jaytee recognized that he was unable 
to constrain the most powerful, largest opponents and for a period 
of time would be unable to fully co-opt the health department. 
However, he recognized that due to access, interest, the absence of 
an electronic medical record (EMR) system, and the huge benefits 
for helping them handle patient overload, the largest private clinic in 
the country could be his first target to sign up. It would serve as a safe 
haven from health department opponents. As a result of his analysis, 
he recognized an opportunity to create an ally that would provide 
him with a safe place from which to build a position. Success with 
this highly influential ally would then perhaps put him in a position 
to go back to the government health department with demonstrated 
efficacy and efficiency for his EMR system. Due to this finding, he 
then created a Tactics table (Table 7.4) for attending to this potential  
safe-haven ally.
  Through this Tactics table for his major potential ally, Jaytee 
discovered that the private clinic’s deep concern was with uncon-
trollable patient overload and exploding costs, which would enable 
him to approach the clinic with a deep understanding of its problem Address the Inevitable Sociopolitics      71
Table 7.3: AidsAid Tactics Table for Health Department Opponents 
Tactical option Health department officials
Can you deploy your capabilities to solve  No
opponent’s problem in order to build influence 
for horse-trading?
Or
Can you threaten to deploy your capabilities  No
to aggravate opponent’s position?
Can you reward opponent for cessation  No
of opposition?
Or
Can you deploy your resources to threaten  No
to aggravate opponent’s position? 
Can you use allies or your ally’s allies to  No
neutralize opponent or heat-shield your 
project from the opponent?
Can you create a safe haven away from  The private clinic cannot be prohibited from
opponent retaliation? installing an EMR system. Perhaps Jaytee can start  
  there and demonstrate viability and efficacy.
and confidence that he could arrange an advisory program that would 
improve patient management and reduce operating costs.
  After addressing his biggest opponent and biggest ally, he was 
ready to move on to look at tactics for the other stakeholders. 
  A necessary condition for the system he envisioned would be that 
all medical records be processed electronically, in order to ensure that 
the record system he was installing had highly reliable and rapid data 
utilization. He was aware that the major medical analysis laboratory 
was still on manual recordkeeping and transmission, and he ran into 
a resistance problem with the lab’s owner. To “convert” this needed 
indifferent into a cooperative supplier providing electronic rather Type of support needed: Approval and installation of AidsAid in clinics nationwide
Major current issues occupying stakeholder attention:  Current expensive 
and as yet unsuccessful electronic system72     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
Table 7.4: AidsAid Tactics Table for Private Clinic Ally 
Tactical option Private clinic CEO
Can you deploy your knowledge  Jaytee has access to deep experience and skills in operations
and skills? and financial management, which can be deployed to assist 
  the private clinic in its practice-management challenges.
Can you deploy your physical and  No
financial resources?
Can you deploy your network or Jaytee could arrange via connections with the sister business
  school of the Ivy medical school to send a team of experienced 
   interns to study, revamp, and update clinic operations.
than paper analytical reports, he worked his way through a Tactics 
table for this needed indifferent (Table 7.5).
  Discussions with the owner of the medical analysis lab revealed 
that he was concerned with the considerable time and effort it would 
require to convert his lab from a paper-based system to an electronic 
one. However, he was also aware that eventually this would have to 
be done. Jaytee realized that he might be able to send IT trainers 
from an Ivy medical school program in the country. He was able to 
persuade the head of this medical school to “lend” a group of people 
working in the program to train a staff member of the lab in all the 
skills necessary to operate an electronically based recordkeeping 
system. 
  Now over to you. For your primary opponents, potential allies, 
and needed indifferents, scan your own Tactics table and look 
for ways to block, avoid, or reduce the opposition of the primary 
opponent, secure the support of potential allies, and persuade needed 
indifferents. Try to keep it simple. Complicated strategies are hard to 
implement, and it is easy to build an overly elaborate sociopolitical Type of support needed:  Approval, development, and installation of AidsAid in clinic
Major current issues occupying stakeholder attention: Clinic system overload and 
budget stressAddress the Inevitable Sociopolitics      73
Table 7.5: AidsAid Tactics Table for Indifferent Laboratory
Tactical option Laboratory
Can you deploy your capabilities to  Offer to train lab owner’s technicians in electronic data entry,
solve indifferent’s problems in order  analysis, and recordkeeping.
to secure indifferent’s support? Arrange for IT students at the major university to convert
  paper records to electronic ones.
Can you deploy your physical and AidsAid has no such resources.
financial resources to entice the 
indifferent’s support?
Can you use your allies or ally’s  Jaytee could “borrow” skilled trainers from an Ivy medical
allies in your network to mobilize  school to train lab technicians.
indifferents?
house of cards that collapses under the slightest pressure. The pro-
fitable execution of your project will be difficult enough without 
your resorting to Machiavellian convolutions.
  The trick is to identify the top three primary opponents, and 
use your Tactics table to identify moves to manage, either on your 
own or with allies, that opposition. Identify your most important 
potential allies and use the Tactics table to see how to secure their 
support, either with direct help for your program, or with handling 
opponents, or with persuading needed indifferents. Then identify 
needed indifferents, if any, and carry out the tactics development 
analysis.
  In our fieldwork, we discovered a particular type of ally who 
may be crucial to your success: the godparent. An example might 
include an influential member of government who is willing to be a 
heat-shield for the social venture and guide it through the political 
and bureaucratic landscape. The larger a project, the more valuable 
it is to have this ally, who can serve as a heat shield with local and Type of support needed: Electronic uploading, input, transmission, and recording of data
Major current issues occupying stakeholder attention:  Lab has inadequate and 
insufficient IT capabilities and can see future need for this upgrade74     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
national governments. Y ou need individuals and organizations 
willing to protect your growing enterprise from unnecessary delays 
and to help you get through the bureaucratic morass when it holds 
you back, seemingly indefinitely. Failing to identify and secure the 
support of a godparent is tantamount to condemning your project to 
death.
Chapter Checklist
Following the processes outlined in this chapter, you will have:
 m   Determined who benefits from your business and who is at 
risk of negative impact.
 m   Identified all stakeholders, even those not directly affected by 
your business but capable of impacting it, and determined how 
active each one is or soon will be, and how much clout each has 
to affect others.
 m   Identified your key allies and determined whether you have 
the ability to deploy them.
 m   Identified your primary opponents and determined whether 
you have the capabilities to neutralize them.
 m   Identified needed indifferents and determined whether you 
will be able to mobilize them.
Tough Love Test
If you answer no to any of the following questions, you might want 
to rethink your idea. If you answer no more than three times, you 
should proceed, if at all, with extreme trepidation. It simply won’t be 
worth your time and resources if you cannot surmount the challenges 
at this early stage. If you answer yes to all the following questions, by 
all means, continue on to phase two of your idea.
 1.   Have you and your advisory group identified your key stake-
holders (allies, opponents, and indifferents) and do you all 
agree on what major issues they face? Address the Inevitable Sociopolitics      75
 2.   Are you confident you can deploy your allies?
 3.   Are you confident you can neutralize your opponents?
 4.   Are you confident you can mobilize the support of needed 
indifferents?
 5.   If your project will be large in scale, do you have a “godparent” 
who can shield you from local and national political 
intervention?Develop a Concept Statement 
77CHAPTER 8
Congratulations! Y ou’ve taken the bold step of working your idea 
through the first phase of the social enterprise development 
process. If you go no further in this book, you have already come a 
long way. Spending primarily your imagination, you’ve imposed a 
rigorous set of Tough Love Tests on your idea and now have a good 
sense of whether it is at risk of failure (if that’s the case, you’ve lost 
very little) or looks plausible (if that’s the case, then congratulations!).  
  Before moving on to phase two to plan your social enterprise, we 
suggest you complete a concept statement, a simple document that 
outlines your discoveries from chapters 1 through 7. The concept 
statement is a short, powerful articulation of the outcome of all the 
due diligence you have done so far. It is best done in the “canvas” 
format recently popularized by Alexander Osterwalder,21 with our 
version of it shown in this chapter. 
  The concept statement table summarizes the essence of the 
problem you wish to attack and the solution you intend to apply 
to ameliorate the problem. It specifies the market segments you 
are going after and the criteria by which you will measure your 
performance, along both social and financial dimensions. It identifies 
the competition you will be facing and how beneficiaries are going to 
have to change their behavior in order to benefit from your actions. 
It specifies the beneficiary experience, the capabilities they require 
to benefit, and the capabilities you must have for your idea to work. 
Finally, it pragmatically identifies the sociopolitics the venture will 
experience and lays out the political strategy you intend to use to 
address it. Y our concept statement can be used to solicit feedback 78     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
from your advisors and stakeholders. It can also be used to approach 
investors and other sources of financial support. Table 8.1 provides a 
framework for creating a concept statement.
  To demonstrate what a concept statement for Zambia Feeds 
might look like, see Table 8.2.Table 8.1: Concept Statement Template
The problem and the proposed solution
1. Problem
2. Proposed solution
3. Required behavioral changes and associated challenges
Business proposition
1. Unit of social impact
2. Unit of revenue
Market and competition
1. Identify market segment.
2. Identify most competitive alternative.
3. State how your solution is better than most competitive alternative.
Sociopolitical landscape
1. Who benefits from my business?
2. Who is hurt by my business?
3. Who are the key stakeholders?
4. Who are my allies?
5. Who are my opponents?Develop a Concept Statement       79
Table 8.2: Concept Statement for Zambia Feeds
Articulate the problem and proposed solution
1. Problem: 1. Malnutrition and unemployment in Zambia
2. Proposed solution: 2.  Develop an animal feeds business (selling poultry feed)
    that would open up new markets for subsistence and 
small-scale farmers, who would then feed their families 
(addressing malnutrition) and sell fowls in the local 
markets (earning money).
3. Required behavioral changes  3. Educate the unemployed in the community about the
 and associated challenges:  benefits of raising animals and teach them the entire  
   process of raising and selling chickens.
Business proposition
1. Unit of social impact: 1. Daily protein serving
2. Unit of revenue: 2. 25 kg bag of animal feed
Market and competition
1. Identify market segment: 1. Subsistence and small-scale farmers and unemployed
   people
2. Identify most competitive  2. High-priced feed producers
 alternative:
3. State how your solution is better  3. Lower-cost, higher-quality feed
 than most competitive alternative:
Sociopolitical landscape
1. Who benefits from my business?  1. Local individuals and families
2. Who is hurt by my business? 2. When the business gets big enough, larger competitors 
   in adjacent areas to Copperbelt 
3. Who are the key stakeholders? 3. Veterinary board, customers, government (a quality 
   standards board, Zambia’s equivalent of the U.S. FDA)
4. Who are my allies? 4. Those our business bought raw materials from, vendors,  
   the customers, and employees of the host company
5. Who are my opponents? 5. When the business gets big enough, bigger existing  
   competitors80     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
Chapter Checklist 
Following the processes in this very short chapter, you will have: 
 m   Completed a concept statement.
Tough Love Test
If you answer yes to the following two questions, you are ready to 
move on to phase two. If you answer no, you have more work to do.
 1.   Have you and your advisory group put together a concept 
statement similar to the one in Table 8.2?
 2.   Do you have consensus that this concept statement appro-
priately captures the due diligence you have put in to define 
and design your social enterprise?  PHASE TWO
From Plausible to Probable:
Plan Your Social EnterpriseFrame and Scope the Venture
83CHAPTER 9
The first eight chapters of the book guided you through a “due 
diligence” process to make sure you have really thought through 
the fundamental business proposition of your venture. It is now time 
to focus on the operational plausibility of your idea. From here, we 
will pay a lot more attention to the development of the numbers 
that will be driving your business. If you’re not particularly skilled 
at number-crunching, this might be a good time to sit down with 
someone who is and ask them to guide you through the calculations 
that will indicate whether your project, which makes social impact 
sense, also makes financial sense.  
  When we left Ilona at the end of phase one, she had come to 
the conclusion that her concept for a social enterprise was not only 
possible but plausible. She had articulated the problem (malnutrition 
and unemployment), identified a potential solution (start a business 
selling chicken feed), and settled on a target segment of the market 
(small-scale or subsistence farmers) that would buy her feed to raise 
chickens. The next big step for her would be to create a baseline plan 
to see how the enterprise looks on paper and to determine what she 
needs to do to meet her revenue and social-impact goals. 
 Phase two covers the planning process, which will take a concept 
from plausible to probable. In this chapter and the next two, we will 
walk through the three steps for creating a discovery-driven plan 
(DDP) for your social enterprise. The DDP method was developed 
by Rita Gunther McGrath and Ian MacMillan in their book The 
Entrepreneurial Mindset .22 Created for use in uncertain business 
environments, it is a powerful tool for social entrepreneurs. This 84     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
widely used approach to planning helps managers navigate their way 
to the real opportunity, or abandon the idea if it is not feasible, at the 
lowest possible cost. 
  The core premise behind a DDP is that companies need to be able 
to plan in a way that maximizes learning and minimizes financial 
exposure. Rather than creating a plan and obstinately sticking with 
it no matter what happens, the DDP approach emphasizes learning 
and redirection as the reality of your situation is made clear, driving 
down the cost of failure if things don’t work out. This approach is 
crucial in high-uncertainty environments, where it is difficult to 
anticipate the major challenges you will face. The three key features 
of a DDP are:
 •   Framing and scoping (outlined in this chapter)—that is, deciding 
what are your revenue and social impact goals and determining 
the resulting scope of operations required to achieve them;
 •   Identifying operating costs and durable asset costs (covered in 
chapter 10); and
 •   Documenting assumptions, creating key checkpoints at which 
assumptions will be tested, and then continually updating and 
revisiting assumptions as the project unfolds (chapter 11). 
Framing and Scoping the Venture
Social enterprises generally start in highly uncertain environments 
where very little is known, particularly if you are attempting to create 
an entirely new market. Here, the DDP becomes indispensable, 
because you begin with a frame, a clear specification of what you 
want to achieve annually in terms of social impact and financial 
performance once the program is running at a steady state, three 
to five years after start-up. More specifically, you quantify the mini-
mally acceptable social impact target (how many social impact 
units the project would need to generate) and minimum required 
financial/funding performance target (how many units of revenue Frame and Scope the Venture      85
it should make in order for it to be worth the effort). Remember, 
in chapter 2 you specified the revenue unit and the social impact 
unit by which you would measure your project performance. For 
example, “By year five, I want to be reducing the number of diabetes-
generated leg amputations by 5% per year and generating profits of 
$200,000 per year from the ongoing business operation. ” 
  It is then possible to reverse-calculate to determine what 
the revenues, the maximum allowable costs, and the allowable 
investment in assets must be in order to make these profits. So, while 
you do not yet know your actual revenues and costs, you can specify 
what they need to be  in order for you to make your financial targets. 
With those numbers, you can back into the scope of operations 
required to deliver the desired social impact units and revenue units 
determined in your framing. Ironically, since under near-Knightian 
conditions you don’t know what is going to happen, you have the 
“luxury” of being able to say what must happen for your idea to be 
worth the effort. When you frame your project, specify what the 
social impact and financial outcomes must be, once the venture is 
up and running, to be worth your while. Once you have framed the 
required performance, scope the venture by determining how big it 
needs to be, when it is operating at a steady state, in order for you to 
make your frame numbers.
  The social impact frame and the revenue frame are important for 
two reasons: First, they are meaningful to you and your organization; 
second, they are meaningful to the key stakeholders—bankers, 
investors, potential suppliers—because you need to be seen as capable 
of delivering sufficient social impact and financial performance 
to convince these stakeholders that you deserve their support. 
Remember that other organizations are seeking their support. 
There are competing demands for the resources your stakeholders 
will risk by providing funds, skills, and materials to you rather than 
to alternative resource seekers. For example, if you intend to use a 
bank for financial assistance, the bank loan officer will need to be 86     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
convinced that your business can generate enough funds to repay the 
interest and ultimately pay off the loan. Similarly, suppliers will need 
to be convinced that it is worth the risk of supplying you with the 
materials you buy on credit from them. Prospective employees may 
need to feel convinced that your venture is a superior employment 
opportunity for them compared to what they are currently doing. 
Customers such as other businesses will need to have confidence 
that you will be able to provide a consistent, reliable supply of your 
offering. Finally, beneficiaries will need to be confident that once they 
adjust their behaviors to capture your benefits, you will survive and 
continue to provide those benefits. It is easy to assume that because 
your product or service is beneficial, beneficiaries must switch from 
old to desired behaviors, but the perceived longevity of the business 
plays a big part in their decision to risk switching. 
  Once you have framed the venture with these objectives, 
determine what the physical scope of the venture needs to be to 
make the desired numbers. In other words, how big does the venture 
need to be in order for you to fulfill your social impact and financial 
goals? For example, how many widgets do you need to sell, how 
many people do you need to employ, how many people must be fed, 
or how many children must be inoculated?
  Again, you should complete your DDP based on what should be 
happening three to five years after start-up, not at start-up. Only if 
the three-to-five-year targets seem doable should you then go into 
detailed planning of the launch. If they do not look doable in three 
to five years, drop the project.
  To illustrate framing and scoping, let’s start with a simple project: 
the Khaya Cookie Company case. Then we’ll return to the more 
complicated Zambia Feeds case. 
Framing and Scoping: Khaya Cookie Company
Social entrepreneur Alicia Polak came to us several years ago with an 
idea for an employability project in South Africa. One social statistic Frame and Scope the Venture      87
that upset her was that in many shantytowns of South Africa, up 
to 70% of black women who headed households were unemployed. 
These women typically had as many as five or more dependents (a 
figure that reflects the growing number of lives lost to HIV/AIDS). 
Polak saw the situation not as an employment problem, but as an 
employability problem. The difference is that the unemployable have 
few skill sets, little or no education, and no work experience. Further, 
they are trapped in this desperate situation because of their minimal 
education and absent skills, and are often required to stay at home 
and care for children. Polak founded Khaya Cookie Company with 
the main goal of generating employability by developing employee 
skills through setting up a cookie plant in the middle of Khayelitsha, 
one of the toughest shantytowns in the province, where women 
would be trained and employed to make quality cookies for sale 
outside the township. 
  Let’s look at Polak’s framing objectives. 
Framing Social Impact: Social Impact Goals 
Polak decided she needed to train and employ women, so her unit of 
social impact was one trained and employable formerly unemployed 
woman. She wanted to do this for at least 300 women—a number she 
arrived at after considering the minimum impact she desired to have 
in order to feel that her efforts and investment were worthwhile. This 
resulted in the following social impact goal:
   Social impact goal:  300 trained and employed women within 
three years
 Note that these goals are often the decision of the social entre-
preneur, but we recommend that you and your advisory group 
carefully consider the aspirations and expectations of key supportive 
stakeholders identified in chapter 7. In order to mobilize them, they 88     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
will need to be convinced that the social enterprise is worth their 
(risky) support.
Framing Financial Impact: Financial Goals
Polak decided that $60,000 per annum was the minimum profit that 
would justify her forgoing employment alternatives in the region, 
thus:
   Financial goals: $60,000 annual profits after all expenses with a 
15% return on sales (ROS)23 and a 20% return on assets (ROA).24
Scoping the Venture Based on the Social Impact Goals
Polak was planning to make gourmet-quality American-style 
cookies (such as chocolate chip cookies and ginger snaps) and a 
few other traditional, local types of cookies. After considerable 
experimentation with local workers over weekends, given the type 
of product she planned to make and the production system she 
envisioned, she estimated that one new job would be created for 
every 800 boxes of cookies she sold per year.* 
  A job with Khaya Cookie Company, however, was more than 
just a “job. ” It was an opportunity to train a formerly unskilled (and 
therefore unemployable) woman, who could then earn income for 
her family either by continuing to work at Khaya or by using her 
newfound skills in other companies nearby.
  Alicia’s estimate was validated in discussions with local cookie 
manufacturers. She made it a priority to meet with a number of 
baked goods producers in order to gather estimates of production 
capacities, costs, and employment impact prospects. She did so first 
by identifying a well-known food scientist and consultant who had 
* This is total job creation: Cookie production requires more than just the person 
baking. There are employment activities associated with storing, packing, carting, 
transporting, box assembly, recordkeeping, and so on.Frame and Scope the Venture      89
worked with many bakers and knew almost all the bakeries in the 
region.
  Based on her estimates, in order to create 300 jobs, the business 
would be required to sell 240,000 boxes of cookies annually (300 x 
800 = 240,000) into the target market three to five years from start-
up.25 This equates to required monthly sales of 20,000 boxes of 
cookies. In Table 9.1, the calculation is repeated in tabular form. 
Scoping the Venture Based on the Financial Goals
Polak has set a financial goal of a minimum profit of $60,000 per 
annum. If the industry net profit margin for premium producers 
is approximately 15%, then her cookie business must generate 
$60,000/15% = $400,000 in annual sales. If retailers will pay about 
$2.00 per box, the required annual number of boxes of cookie sales 
is $400,000/$2.00 = 200,000 boxes per year. This equates to 16,667 
boxes per month. In Table 9.2, the calculation is repeated in tabular 
form. Table 9.1: Scoping the Venture—Social Impact Goals for Khaya Cookies
Social impact unit: 1 trained and employed formerly  1
unemployed woman
 
Venture social impact goal: 300 trained and employed women 300
Single employee production capacity (handmade and  800
hand-packed boxes of cookies) 
Number of cookie box sales required per year to train and  240,000
employ 300 women
 
Required number of boxes of cookies sold per month  20,00090     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
Table 9.2: Scoping the Venture—Financial Goals for Khaya Cookies
Revenue unit: 1 box of cookies (sold to customers) 1
 
Surplus/profit goal $60,000 
Profitability target/performance cushion 15%
Required total sales/annum $400,000 
Estimated wholesale price for a box of cookies $2.00 
Required number of boxes of cookies sold per year 200,000
Required number of boxes of cookies sold per month  16,667
  Going through these two calculations g ives us two key numbers 
that determine the actual physical number of boxes needed to 
be sold to accomplish the business idea. Using these two scoping 
specifications, Polak can now compare how many boxes of cookies it 
will take to accomplish her social impact objective with the number 
of boxes of cookies to accomplish her financial objective.
  Before she has even sold her first box of cookies, Polak is already 
getting insight into the necessary scope of the envisioned venture 
and what the impact might be on revenues and employment. This is 
worrisome news—if she were to reach her financial goals, she would 
still not be selling enough cookies to achieve the social impact goal 
of 300 employees. However, if she can sell enough cookies to employ 
300 women, she will comfortably make her financial target.
  Note that in Polak’s case her social impact scope and her 
financial scope require similar production quantities. This represents 
alignment between the desired social impact and her financial Social impact scope Financial scope
20,000 boxes of cookies per month 16,667 boxes of cookies per monthFrame and Scope the Venture      91
aspirations. Such alignment is important—and is useful when you 
are talking to investors who are interested in supporting only social 
enterprises with high potential to be financially self-sufficient; for 
attracting management team members and employees who may 
be concerned with the long-term viability of your program; and 
for convincing suppliers and bankers that their participation has 
sustainable foundation.
  Bear in mind also that these are Polak’s goals and best estimates 
of production capacity given her very early research and envisaged 
methods of production in a highly uncertain environment. As the 
reality of the situation emerges, so will her expectations. This is okay, 
as long as she forges a way to meet her minimum requirements. 
Anything more is a welcome bonus.
 Now let’s look at the framing and scoping of Zambia Feeds. 
Framing and Scoping: Zambia Feeds
This case is more complex than that of Khaya Cookie Company 
because the entrepreneur, Ilona, is not selling the “end product, ” 
namely, chickens. Her business is to sell chicken feed to farmers, who 
then feed chickens and sell them at market. Thus, her calculations 
have an added step that Khaya Cookie Company does not.
Framing Social Impact: Social Impact Goals
Remember, Ilona decided that her social impact goal would be to 
enhance nutrition in her region, specifically protein consumption 
through increased availability of chicken meat at lower cost, by 
supplying enough chicken feed to increase regional production 
of chicken meat by at least 1 million servings per year once the 
venture was up and running (which was enough for 10,000 people to 
consume two servings of protein per week). 
  Social Impact Goal:  1 million protein portions per year92     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
Framing Financial Impact: Financial Goals
A typical bag size for this type of product is 25 kilograms, a weight 
that is portable on a bicycle or wheelbarrow. Ilona initially chose a 25 
kg bag of feed as her revenue unit.
  For her time, effort, and entrepreneurial skills, Ilona decided she 
would generate an annual profit (or surplus for nonprofit companies) 
of $65,000 per year pre-tax (which would provide after-tax funds 
of about $45,000)—a suitable but not exorbitant compensation for 
absorbing the uncertainty of the start-up.
  A reasonable pre-tax profit on sales for companies in Zambia was 
between 10% and 20%, and a reasonable return on assets was between 
15% and 25%. Given that poultry production was widely regarded 
as a high-volume, low-margin business, Ilona decided to shoot for 
profitability targets of 12.5% ROS and 20% ROA.* Having spoken 
with bankers and suppliers, she assumed this kind of profitability 
would be enough to convince them to support her. Bear in mind that 
these were approximate numbers, taken across industries, and are 
no more than a start to the plan. In high-uncertainty environments, 
or those with little available data, it is sometimes necessary to begin 
with such proxy data simply because there is nothing better with 
which to start.
   Financial Goals:  $65,000 pre-tax profits, with a minimum of 
12.5% pre-tax ROS and 20% ROA
  With these numbers, Ilona could now back into the required 
scope of the venture. 
* Bankers and suppliers typically consider at least two measures of performance. The 
first is profitability, measured by ROS, and the second is ROA.Frame and Scope the Venture      93
Scoping the Venture Based on the Social Impact Goals
First, how many 25 kg bags of animal feed will Ilona need to sell per 
year to ensure that at least 1 million daily protein portions of chicken 
meat are produced per year?
  Discussions with veterinarians and brokers from the poultry 
industry in South Africa revealed that the optimal weight to sell a 
live chicken is 4 pounds, and that this yields 8 daily protein portions 
of edible meat.
  To produce 1 million annual portions would require 1,000,000/8 
= 125,000 chickens per year, each weighing 4 pounds.
  Next, how much feed is needed to grow a 4-pound chicken?
It takes approximately 2 pounds of good-quality feed to yield 1 pound 
of chicken, so it takes about 8 pounds of feed to grow a 4-pound live 
chicken.
  To grow 125,000 chickens requires 8 (pounds) x 125,000 = 
1,000,000 pounds of feed per year.
  In Table 9.3, the calculation is repeated in tabular form. 
This is the scope of operations required to achieve the social impact 
goal. How does this compare with the scope to accomplish the 
financial goal?Table 9.3: Scoping the Venture—Social Impact Goals for Zambia Feeds
Social impact unit goal: daily protein servings produced annually 1,000,000
Approximate protein servings per 4 lb. chicken (6–8) 8
Required number of chickens to be sold 125,000
Approximate pounds of feed required per pound of chicken 2
Required pounds of feed to produce per 4 lb. chicken 8
Required feed sales (lbs.) per year 1,000,000
Or U.S. tons per year 50094     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
Scoping the Venture Based on the Financial Goals
On checking wholesale prices for feed in Lusaka, the capital of 
Zambia, Ilona found the average price per ton of feed was $660 for 
large-scale producers buying in bulk, which meant that for 25 kg of 
bulk feed, the wholesale price would be about $18. To create a market 
of small-scale producers, she estimated a price per bag of about $20.
  Since Ilona wanted to make at least $65,000 in pre-tax profits, 
with a ROS of 12.5%, this called for revenues of 65,000/0.125 = 
$520,000.
  This meant that at $20 per bag, to generate the $520,000 revenues, 
she would need to sell 520,000/20 = 26,000 bags per year.
  Converting this number of 25 kg bags per year to tons, this 
comes to about 717 U.S. tons of feed per year.
  In Table 9.4, the calculation is repeated in tabular form. 
  Going through these two calculations gives us the two key 
numbers that essentially set up the actual physical activity needed to 
accomplish the business idea. Using these two scoping specifications, 
Ilona can now compare what it will take in physical tons per month 
of feed to accomplish her social impact goal with what it will take in 
tons to accomplish her financial goal.Table 9.4: Scoping the Venture—Financial Goals for Zambia Feeds 
Revenue unit: 25 kg bag of feed (sold to customers) 25
Surplus/pre-tax profit goal $65,000 
Pre-tax profitability target  12.5%
Required total sales $520,000
 
Estimated market price for a bag of feed $20
 
Required number of feed bags sold 26,000
Required annual sales in U.S. tons (26,000 bags x 25 kg =  717
650,000 kg at 907 kg/U.S. tons = U.S. tons per year)Frame and Scope the Venture      95
  The number on the left represents the number of U.S. tons of 
product per year Zambia Feeds will have to sell to make its social 
impact goals; the number on the right represents the number of 
tons of product per year Zambia Feeds will have to sell to make its 
financial goals.
  Looking at the two scope numbers, you can see that if Ilona can 
build a business to achieve her financial goals by selling 717 U.S. tons 
a year, she will very comfortably make her social impact goal. In fact, 
she might consider reducing her financial aspirations or increasing 
the social impact goal to bring about alignment. 
  This two-scope comparison has three possible outcomes:
  1.  The numbers are close (we use 10%). This suggests that the 
two goals are in alignment.
  2.  The minimum required units of business to make the financial 
goals are higher than needed (greater than 10% difference) for 
the benefit desired. This is good news: if the social enterprise 
can be built to deliver the revenue units, the project will 
have even higher social impact goals than planned. But the 
challenge is to configure a business that will actually deliver 
the target revenue. The closer the plan can be configured to 
yield the target financial goals, the greater the likelihood of 
accomplishing the prime goal, which is social impact.
  3.  The bad news, as in the case of Khaya Cookie Company, is 
when the minimum required revenue generation units are 
lower (greater than 10% difference) than those needed for 
the social impact desired. This suggests that even though you 
may make your financial goals, your social impact will fall 
short of what you wanted, which was the purpose of your 
enterprise in the first place. In cases like this, you may want Social impact scope Financial scope
500 U.S. tons per year 717 U.S. tons per year96     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
to seriously consider either walking away from the project 
(if you want to preserve the “integrity” of your social impact 
priority) or compromise and lower the social impact target.
  Note that the DDP you will begin to develop to meet this frame 
and scope looks at the operations you need to put into place three 
to five years out, when the enterprise is operating at a steady state 
that delivers the scope you have set, and therefore the social impact 
and financial goals that make it worth the risk and effort. Only if it 
looks like you can achieve these conditions should you invest the 
energy it will take to launch and ramp up operations to that state. 
For example, in the case of Ilona, her steady-state targets were 717 
U.S. tons per year feed production—if she could not meet that, 
why bother? But clearly she would not hit that production target 
overnight—it could take at least three years to get there. So her DDP 
will be built around production levels of 717 U.S. tons per year, and 
only if it looked doable would she then examine what it would take 
to start from scratch and build to that production of 700-plus U.S. 
tons per year.
What Scoping Means to Nonprofits
It may not be typical for a nonprofit to use terms such as profit  or 
surplus . But even for a nonprofit, it is important to build in a modest 
surplus of funds over expected costs in order to provide a cushion 
from unexpected expenses and economic or market shocks. Often 
nonprofits operating at close to break-even, especially young ones, 
crumble at the first unexpected setback, increase in expenses, or 
reduction in funding, which leaves the nonprofit bankrupted and 
the beneficiaries stranded, sometimes worse off than before. Profit 
or a planned modest revenue surplus provides a cushion for defense 
against unexpected adversities. Furthermore, accumulated surpluses 
can always be used to grow the program once it is more established.Frame and Scope the Venture      97
Reality-Checking Y our Numbers
In the next chapter, we will take the framing and scoping numbers 
and start to estimate the costs and revenues associated with all 
the activities you identified in your Beneficiary Experience and 
Deliverables tables from chapters 4, 5, and 6. Before doing so, 
however, look at your framing and scoping figures with a critical eye 
and ask whether they seem plausible. Y ou can do this through one of 
the following approaches:
 •  Compare your social impact frame with the whole beneficiary 
population.  If, in your initial calculations, it appears that you 
will need to deliver your benefits to 50% of the beneficiaries, 
look at the overall number of potential beneficiaries and ask 
yourself whether capturing 50% of the “beneficiary market” 
seems plausible. If your estimates show that you have to sell your 
product to 5,000 people per month and there are only 10,000 
people living in the region, you might want to rethink your sales 
targets or adjust your expectations.
 •  Assess comparable firms.  If there are competing organizations, 
assess the “beneficiary market share” and capacity of your com-
petition or firms comparable to yours. If your numbers are much 
greater than theirs, this should be a red flag. Y ou should be able 
to point with confidence to the powerful advantage your firm 
will have in comparison with most competitive alternatives.
  If, in this process, you find that your initial social and financial 
goals can’t be met, reformulate by revisiting the numbers to come up 
with a more plausible set of goals—provided, of course, they continue 
to be worth your while, and attractive to your key stakeholders. 
Remember that this is just the first step in building a viable learning 
and execution plan. It is very likely that, in doing your tables, you 
will already be reformulating your ideas and determining reasonable 
expectations. This is a normal course of events.98     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
  Before proceeding, you should do one more thing: perform 
another low-cost reality check. Talk to people on the ground—again. 
Communicate with people living where you plan to launch your 
venture and ask them to weigh in on the feasibility and acceptability 
of your project at the scale you are now considering. Elicit their 
reaction to the following questions:
 •   What do we absolutely have to do from a legal perspective to 
operate this scale of business here? 
 •   What is it about our concept at this stage that would cause you 
alarm? 
 •   What is it about our concept at this stage that would really appeal 
to you? 
 •   What obstacles do you anticipate we will encounter?
 •   What similar initiatives have previously failed here and why?
Chapter Checklist
Following the processes outlined in this chapter, you will have:
 m   Based on the minimum social impact goals you framed, 
calculated the scope of the business in the form of the physical 
units of output it will take to meet the social frame, and thought 
about the plausibility of a business with this scope.
 m   Based on the minimum financial goals you framed, calculated 
the scope of the business in the form of the physical units of 
output it will take to meet the financial goals, and thought 
about the plausibility of a business with this scope.
 m   Compared the scopes you calculated from both goals (social 
and financial) to see if your financial goal can be met while you 
achieve your social impact goal or better, and adjusted your 
aspirations if not.
 m   Run your project by people on the ground to assess its 
acceptability and ensure it is doable, and identified obstacles 
you may encounter with implementation. Frame and Scope the Venture      99
 m   Run your numbers by your advisory group members, asking 
for any concerns they might have, and heard, if not heeded, 
their recommendations.
Tough Love Test
If you answer no to any of the following questions, you should 
seriously reconsider your idea. If you answer no more than once, 
you should drop the idea. It simply won’t be worth your time and 
resources if you cannot surmount the challenges at this early stage. If 
you answer yes to all the following questions, by all means, continue 
on to the next chapter.
 1.   Are you and your advisors confident that the calculated scope, 
in the form of physical units of output it will take to meet the 
social frame, is plausible for your venture?
 2.   Does the calculated scope of your venture, in the form of 
physical units of output it will take to meet the financial frame, 
seem in line with or better than the social scope?
 3.   Have you run your venture by people on the ground to assess 
its acceptability, and asked them to identify obstacles you may 
encounter with implementation and achieving your envisaged 
scope of operations?Specify Deliverables 
101CHAPTER 10
In chapter 6 we introduced the concept of the Deliverables table. 
This table prompts you to list all major activities that must be 
completed in order for your venture to be able to deliver the benefits, 
or social impact, you have in mind. We asked you to consider the 
types of costs you might incur. Here, we begin to attach some actual 
numbers to these types of costs. This process will allow you to 
develop a plan that looks at the cost and revenue flows your venture 
will generate each year once it is successful. If these cost estimates 
and performance projections look plausible, begin looking at how 
to launch your venture. If not, take a step back and invoke your 
enterprising mind-set to rethink and create a more plausible way to 
move your enterprise forward.
Calculating Required Revenues, Maximum  
Allowable Costs, and Maximum Allowable Assets
If you want support from investors, funders, banks, suppliers, and 
other stakeholders, you will need to have a convincing ROS and 
ROA. In this section, you’ll determine the performance boundaries 
for your venture by using your framing numbers from chapter 9 to 
specify what your minimum revenues must be, what maximum costs 
are allowed, and what the maximum amount of funding (for assets) 
should be in order to accomplish the profit targets and adequate 
ROS and ROA targets. 
  Before we launch into this analysis, we want to share some 
key ideas for running a disciplined operation. To keep a business 
sustainable, you need to generate more cash than you spend. There 102     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
are typically four places where you need to generate surplus cash.  
Not all four may be relevant to your enterprise, but you should 
consider which apply and whether there are other potential unanti-
cipated costs. 
 •  Operating surplus. Y ou need to bring in more funds than you 
spend in running the operation. This is pretty straightforward 
and easy to see—in the case of Ilona, she needs to get more 
money from her feed business than she lays out for materials, 
wages, power, rent, maintenance, and so on.
 •  Asset replacement surplus.  In the event that you require assets 
such as machinery, office supplies, IT equipment, and trucks, 
recognize that these eventually wear out, and you will need to 
generate enough funds to replace them. To do this, you need to 
charge yourself proportionate depreciation costs each year, and 
that is the surplus you need to generate from operations.
 •  Inventory and receivables surplus.  If you have a physical  
product, to protect yourself from the uncertainties and 
unpredictability of demand for your offering and from delays 
in supply of your materials, you need to build up raw materials 
and finished goods inventories—and these require funds. In 
addition, you will need to set aside funds to absorb the cash flow 
delays while you wait for your beneficiaries to pay. 
 •  Debt and investment servicing surplus.  If you are able to, and 
decide to take out loans, you need to generate additional surplus 
to cover the interest on them and eventually pay them down. 
Even if you decide not to take out loans, as altruistic as your 
investors may be, they will want to see an acceptable return on 
their investment. (After all, they can always altruistically invest 
elsewhere.) So, you need to generate enough surplus funds to 
compete with other seekers of their investment monies.
  
  This may look like grim news, but it explains why so many well-
meaning social and charitable enterprises fail. They raise funds from Specify Deliverables       103
ingenuous donors, launch with enthusiasm and the best intentions, 
but then run out of funds to operate, to replace, and to absorb 
fluctuations in demand and supply, and eventually die because 
they have exhausted donor sources. Sadly, their impact, if they had 
any, ends up being transient, and they occasionally leave behind 
beneficiaries saddled with dependency.
  Y ou owe it to yourself, your employees, and your beneficiaries 
to do the relatively simple calculations needed, starting with a 
specification of performance boundaries: namely, minimum required 
revenue, maximum allowable costs, and maximum allowable assets. 
To determine the minimum revenues and the maximum costs and 
assets, go back to the profit targets and ROS and ROA targets you 
specified in chapter 9. 
  Here we return to Khaya Cookie Company to see how this works.
Minimum Performance Requirements: Khaya Cookie Company
The targets for Khaya Cookie were: $60,000 in profits, 15% ROS, and 
20% ROA. Using these targets, the performance boundaries for the 
venture are as follows:
Minimum Performance Requirements: Khaya Cookie Company
Minimum  required revenues $400,000  Target profit divided by target  
  ROS ($60,000/15%)
Maximum  allowable costs $340,000  Minimum required revenues  
  minus target profit
  ($400,000 – $60,000)
Maximum  allowable assets $300,000  Target profit divided by target  
  ROA ($60,000/20%)Minimum Performance Requirements: Zambia Feeds
Remember, the targets for Zambia Feeds were $65,000 in profits, 
12.5% ROS, and 20% ROA. Using these targets, the performance 
boundaries for the venture are as follows:
  Once you have determined the minimum revenues and maxi-
mum allowable costs and assets, estimate (from your Deliverables 
tables) the expected costs and assets. We do this in the next section.
Estimating the Operating Costs 
As illustrated in chapter 6, the Deliverables table captures all the 
operations activities required to deliver your proposed product 
or service and helps you identify the resources required. In the 
Deliverables table, we documented the need for equipment, staffing, 
and materials for each of the steps in the table. So far, we have 
merely identified the types of costs that would be incurred; the main 
purpose was to make sure we did not forget an important cost or 
funding need. 
  In this section, we will begin to put in estimates for the actual 
amounts  of these costs. Keep in mind that at this stage of planning 
you will not know the exact figure for all potential costs. This is to be 
expected. Y ou will therefore need to make assumptions about many 
of these costs, preferably based on field research. However, as long as 104     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
Minimum Performance Requirements: Zambia Feeds
Minimum  required revenues $520,000  Target profit divided by target 
  ROS ($65,000/12.5%)
Maximum  allowable costs $455,000  Minimum required revenues 
  minus target profit 
  ($520,000 – $65,000)
Maximum  allowable assets $325,000  Target profit divided by target 
  ROA ($65,000/20%)Specify Deliverables      105
you do not commit large investments, it is okay to be roughly right 
rather than precisely wrong. The key point is that you begin to use 
your assumptions to build the financial proposition of your venture 
so you can estimate the likely key drivers of cost and performance 
and the funding that will be required. Greater accuracy will emerge 
as the venture unfolds and you use your accumulating experience to 
convert your assumptions to knowledge.
  When looking at costs, it is important to recognize that there are 
two types. First are the ongoing, day-to-day costs of running your 
enterprise, which are called operating costs. These might include 
costs such as transporting your goods from your business to your 
customers, purchasing containers in which to ship your products, 
paying your employees, or renting your premises. Ideally, these costs 
will be covered by the income generated by your venture. Second 
are durable asset costs, which you will likely incur up front. These 
might include buying equipment and machinery, purchasing land, 
or building up and keeping inventory. 
  An easy way to think about these costs is to imagine a car. The 
car itself would be the fixed, or durable asset, cost, while the gasoline, 
lubrication, and maintenance would be the operating costs. It’s 
critical that you exhaustively identify both kinds of costs, because 
they need to be paid out of the revenues from your venture. Note, 
we almost always suggest that a social entrepreneur first attempt to 
lease or even borrow any durable asset instead of purchasing it. That 
way, you will be able to test your venture without having to invest 
in durable assets, which means a much lower need for (and risk to) 
start-up funding.
  Let’s go back to the Zambia Feeds case. In Ilona’s Deliverables 
table (developed in chapter 6), she outlined the types of costs she 
would incur (see Table 10.1 on the following page). Now she has to 
estimate the approximate costs of these line items, adding columns 
as in Table 10.2 on page 108 to reflect her estimates. There are two 
approaches to this. The easier but less reliable approach is to estimate costs as a percentage of revenues, using the percentages of comparable 
businesses similar to your own. The second is to estimate costs as a 
cost per unit of revenue, using data you are able to get from the field. 
Assigning Costs
As we discussed earlier, in many cases data are hard to come by, if 
not nonexistent. In this case the only available estimate might be an 
industry average percentage of revenues (for a nonprofit, an average 
percentage of budget of similar nonprofits).
  In the early estimates for Zambia Feeds, we had to estimate most 
costs as a percentage of revenues, using data we scrounged from 
South African poultry operations, from large-scale metropolitan 
competitors in Zambia, and from U.S. operations—recognizing that 
the actual numbers would prove to be different. 106     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
Table 10.1: Deliverables Table Identifying Cost Types for Zambia Feeds
Column A Column B Column C Column D
 Equipment  Staff  Materials 
Transportation of raw materials Trucks  Drivers 
to plant  
Raw materials storage Warehouse  Guards   
Raw materials Warehouse  Guards Ingredients 
Bags Warehouse  Guards Bags 
Bag Storage Warehouse  Guards   
Mixing and bagging Mixing plant, 
 bagging plant Mixers, baggers  Power 
Transportation to distribution center Truck  Drivers  Fuel
Final mix stored in bags at    Feed inventory
distribution center    
Administration, financing, Office/rent  Office staff Equipment, 
overhead, distribution, rent   suppliesSpecify Deliverables      107
  In the case of raw materials and bags, Ilona was able to determine 
from her research the cost per ton of feed and cost per bag, instead of 
assuming these costs as a percentage of revenues.
  To calculate the total input cost of a particular type of cost, you 
need:
  • the number of units of input cost per unit of output; 
  • the cost per unit of that input (we call it the pro rata cost); and
  • the total number of output units you will produce. 
  For instance, if every box of output needs 12 nails, and each nail 
costs 20 cents (the pro rata cost per unit), and you intend to produce 
2,000 boxes, then the total nail cost is:
   12 (nails per box) x 0.2 (pro rata dollars per nail) x 2,000 (boxes) 
= $4,800 nail costs
  Similarly, let’s say you are going to produce 10-gallon drums of 
medicine. If every gallon of medicine requires 5 cups of syrup, and 
syrup costs $2 per cup (the pro rata cost per unit), and you intend to 
produce 400 10-gallon drums of medicine product, then your syrup 
costs will be:
   10 (gallons) x 5 (cups per gallon) x 2 (pro rata dollars per cup) x 
400 (drums of output) = $40,000 syrup costs
  Finally, you may not yet have access to fine-grained data and 
may have to resort to prorating your costs as an estimated percentage 
of revenues, using cost per unit of revenue proration from similar 
industries or comparable countries. If every dollar of revenue calls 
for selling costs of 25%, and you intend to generate $100,000 in 
revenues, then your first estimate of selling costs would be: 
   25/100 (pro rata selling cost per dollar revenues) x $100,000 
(revenues from output) = $25,000 selling costs108     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
  Now let’s look at the estimated costs for Zambia Feeds.
Table 10.2: Deliverables for Zambia Feeds —Estimating the Costs
* Examples are per unit sold, percentage of revenues or budget, per month or year, 
per person, per mile, per ton, per square foot, and so on.
Note: Table 10.2 continues across opposite page.Column A Column B Column C Column D Column E
     Estimated pro
 Equipment  Staff  Materials rata cost/unit*
Transportation of raw Trucks  Drivers   2.0%
materials to plant  
Raw materials storage Warehouse  Guards   1.5% 
Raw materials Warehouse  Guards Ingredients  $11.00
(cost/bag)
Bags Warehouse  Guards Bags  $0.50
Mixing and Mixing plant, Mixers, baggers   Power 10.0%
bagging bagging plant 
Finished product Warehouse  Guards   1.5%
storage
  
Transportation to Truck  Drivers  Fuel 2.0%
distribution center
Final mix stored in bags    Feed inventory 1.5%
at distribution center    
Administration,    10.0%
financing, overhead, 
distribution, rentSpecify Deliverables      109
 Column F Column G Column H Column I
 Source of  Assumption Cost Cost estimate
 estimate  number  multiplier (US$)
 % of revenues  1 $520,000 10,400
 Based of typical  revenues
 Zambian industry cost
 % of revenues  2 $520,000 7,800
 Based on typical   revenues
 Zambian industry cost
 Cost per bag  3 26,000 286,000
 Ilona estimate using
 South African data
 Cost per bag 4 26,000 13,000
 Suppliers bags
 % of revenues 6 $520,000 52,000
  Ilona estimate
 
 % of revenues  5 $520,000 7,800
 Based on typical  revenues
 Zambian industry cost
 % of revenues  7 $520,000 10,400
 Based on typical  revenues
 Zambian industry cost
 % of revenues  8 $520,000 7,800
 Based on typical  revenues
 Zambian industry cost
 % of revenues 9 $520,000 52,000
 Typical U.S. industry   revenues 
   
   Total costs $447,200110     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
To break the chart down:
 •  Estimated pro rata cost per unit (column E). This represents the 
pro rata number we will use to multiply the total cost applied 
to the particular cost being estimated. As you can see, all but 
two rows are estimates of what these costs will be as percentage 
of revenue approximations. (Ilona knew specific per-unit costs 
for bags and raw materials.) Estimating costs as a percentage of 
revenues is often a necessary first step in moving forward in the 
absence of better data, subject to validation as your project gets 
going.
 •  Source of estimate (column F). If you have no industry data at 
all, you might just have to make a rough guesstimate, which 
you should clearly flag as such. All these costs were, in fact, 
assumptions Ilona was making, and the procedure here is to make 
assumptions as best you can, then identify the most “dangerous” 
assumptions (those where the cost of  being wrong is the highest). 
Y ou then need to test the most dangerous assumptions ahead  
of significant resource commitments, so that if you are wrong, 
you can bail out before incurring major losses.
 •  Assumption number (column G). This figure allows you to keep 
track of your assumptions by assigning a number that flags each 
one. Y ou will test and recheck these assumptions as the process 
evolves.
 •  Cost multiplier and cost estimate (columns H and I). This 
is where you get around to estimating your costs. In the row 
devoted to bags, the cost of bags is equal to the price per bag (50 
cents from estimated pro rata cost per unit [column E]) times the 
number of bags needed (26,000 in the cost multiplier [column 
H], which we gathered from the scope calculation in chapter 9). 
The cost multiplier is the quantity, or number of units that will be 
used to deliver the business.  When you multiply this quantity by 
the cost per unit, you obtain the estimated total cost for that cost 
type.  If you are estimating costs as a percent of revenues, you use Specify Deliverables      111
the total revenues as your quantity: 26,000 bags x pro rata cost 
per bag of 50 cents = $13,000 as a cost estimate (column I). 
  Similarly, for raw materials, the estimated cost for ingredients 
is calculated from the cost per bag of ingredients ($11 in column E) 
times the total bags to be sold (26,000 in column H) to give a total 
cost of raw materials of 26,000 x 11 = $286,000. In cases where costs 
are to be estimated as a percentage of revenues, the cost multiplier 
we use is the expected revenues. For transportation of raw materials 
to the plant, the cost of transportation is 2% of revenues (column E), 
and the cost multiplier we use is total revenues ($520,000 in column 
H) to give 2% x $520,000 (or $10,400 inserted into column I). The 
same process is followed for all the other costs, which were estimated 
as a percentage of revenues.
  Now work your way through your own Deliverables table, doing 
your best to estimate the cost for each of the steps.
Calculating the Total Costs
Adding up all the figures in the cost estimate column (column I) 
results in the grand total of the estimated costs required to run your 
business. In the case of Zambia Feeds, the total estimated costs are 
$447,200.
  It’s time for the next reality check. With these cost estimates, 
you need to see whether you are going to achieve your financial 
goal within the boundaries of minimum revenues and maximum 
allowable costs just calculated. This is done by putting together an 
operating income statement using the cost estimated from Table 
10.2 (column I).
  All you have to do is see whether you will achieve your operating 
profit (or surplus, in the case of a nonprofit) with the cost estimates 
you’ve just made. If it looks like your planned revenues will exceed 
your costs, and there is a high degree of uncertainty (e.g., there is n o 
similar prior activity in the market), now is a good time to design a 112     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
low-cost test of your concept with the beneficiaries you have in mind. 
We offer examples of such tests next. If your planned revenues will 
not exceed your costs, reconsider your proposed operations model 
and its associated costs, and begin to think carefully and creatively 
about how you might do things differently to lower costs to make 
your venture plausible on paper before you start firing up and burning 
scarce resources. Once again, an enterprising mind-set is key.
Testing the Concept with Beneficiaries
Referring back to your target segment from chapter 3, you must now 
select several target customers (at least five) with whom you will 
test your concept. It is well and good to secure their initial verbal 
commitment, but this does not mean they will actively adopt your 
idea or change their behavior when you are ready to enter the market. 
It is therefore imperative to determine as early as possible whether 
they will actually commit to your initiative and execute their required 
activities. In the case of Zambia Feeds, Ilona designed an experiment 
with a few carefully selected prospects. She recruited two dozen 
candidates, convinced them to try the poultry rearing program, 
mixed the first feed batches by hand using part-time workers, and 
helped the test customers rear the first batches of chickens.
  Once these early adopters had succeeded, Ilona tested their 
commitment further by asking them to buy feed and chicks for the 
next cycle of production. Only then did she have real evidence that 
they would pursue the activity—and she was more comfortable 
in moving forward with her plans. In addition to getting concept 
validation, Ilona was able to learn more about the beneficiaries, their 
response to training, and their willingness to follow production 
guidelines. This was done at low cost, without the purchase of any 
assets other than a dozen shovels, and with the loan of a shed.
  In the case of Khaya Cookie Company, Polak followed a similarly 
enterprising mind-set. Rather than sign a long-term lease on a baking 
production facility, she identified an underutilized community Specify Deliverables      113
building with manifold ovens in a large kitchen and paid a moderate 
amount on a month-to-month basis to use it. Rather than purchase 
commercial convection ovens, she first used the smaller domestic 
ovens that were already there, made several batches of cookies, and 
secured sales in Cape Town restaurants and hotels.
  This mind-set of experimentation and learning is all too often 
absent in eager entrepreneurs in their early planning and execution 
phases. However, it is cheaper to spend your imagination before you 
spend your meager funds in order to learn whether the beneficiaries 
you have in mind really will view your solution the same way 
you do. Y ou would be remiss not to consider a time horizon for 
experimentation. However, this is often easier said than done, as 
the necessary requirements of one enterprise may vary wildly from 
another. For example, it is possible to test a poultry growing concept 
within three to six months, but it may take a full year to develop a 
prototype software program, and another year to test it in the field. 
In principle, however, the shorter the time required to concept-test, 
the better—and we prefer weeks to months for positive evidence of 
the willingness to adopt a solution by beneficiaries. In the examples 
just given, the time span to early evidence ranged from 6 months 
(Zambia Feeds) to 9 months (Khaya Cookie Company). 
  Now let’s return to planning the project and building out the 
projected income statement.
Projected Operating Income Statement
Now that you have determined the approximate costs and have early 
proof-of-concept, determine whether you might make the profits 
you need in order for this business to be financially worth pursuing. 
In other words, can you generate sufficient operating profits (sur-
plus) to cover your operating costs plus the cost of maintaining and 
replacing any assets such as equipment and buildings, plus have 
enough profits left over to repay loans and repay investors? These 
latter types of costs are often forgotten by naïve start-ups—at least 114     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
Minimum Performance Requirements: Zambia Feeds
Minimum required revenues $520,000  Target profit divided by target 
  ROS ($65,000/12.5%)
Maximum allowable costs $455,000  Minimum required revenues 
(from financial framing)  minus target profit 
  ($520,000 – $65,000)
Estimated costs $447,200   
(from Deliverables table)Table 10.3: Zambia Feeds Operating Income Statementuntil the equipment irreparably breaks down or the bank loan officer 
bangs on the door demanding loan repayment.
  Let’s start with operating profits. Earlier in the chapter, we cal-
culated the maximum allowable costs. Now we can compare our 
estimated costs with the maximum allowable costs. If your estimated 
operating costs are more than the maximum allowable costs, your 
business is seriously at risk. This means it will not even be able to 
cover the cost of operations. Even when the allowable costs are greater, 
there need to be enough operating profits to replace assets that wear 
down and to repay the loans you took out to buy those assets.
  The next exercise serves as a powerful reality check for your 
venture, and provides the opportunity to assess your proposed venture 
before committing large amounts of time and resources to an idea 
that may be seriously at risk. Often, well-intentioned entrepreneurs 
don’t engage in this type of disciplined thinking—they assume their 
idea is good and that “things will work out”—only to discover later 
on that they never had a chance of success due to on-the-ground 
realities and constraints such as limited skills availability, high costs 
of capital, poor infrastructure, or simply insufficient demand to meet 
minimum social or revenue targets.
  Let’s take a look at Ilona’s situation, depicted in Table 10.3.
Note: Bear in mind, these are operating costs and that the table doesn’t include asset costs 
and related depreciation costs, interest on loans, or taxes.Specify Deliverables      115
  Comparing the maximum allowable costs (determined earlier 
in the chapter) with the estimated costs from the Deliverables table 
shows that Ilona’s estimated costs are already perilously close to her 
maximum allowable costs. This places her very close to the wind, 
and vulnerable to unexpected costs or cost escalations.
  If the estimated costs had come out even higher—at something 
like $460,000 to $480,000—we would have pushed Ilona to think 
about ways of mitigating the two high-cost items: raw materials and 
mixing and bagging costs. (In fact, it was the high raw materials cost 
that caused us to begin working with University of Pennsylvania’s 
veterinary school to find ways of mixing the highest-quality feed at 
the lowest cost.) If she had been unable to do this, we would have 
encouraged her either to drop the project or perhaps to consider 
making the venture a not-for-profit with subsidies in the form of 
grants for operations.
  A general rule of thumb here is 20%. Our research tells us that 
this cushion of at least 20% between maximum allowable costs and 
estimated costs at this early stage of the planning process is more 
than likely to be a necessary buffer against underestimated or 
unanticipated expenses, as well as covering asset replacement and 
loan repayment. The complete absence of such a cushion should be 
viewed with alarm.
Estimating the Asset/Investment Requirements
Now let’s turn to the kinds of asset costs you will incur and the 
related funding required for these costs. For the sake of simplicity, 
we will refer to long-term assets and short-term assets. Long-term, 
or durable, assets are goods, such as equipment and property, that a 
firm may have to purchase in order to operate. Short-term assets are 
assets that have a relatively short lifespan in the company, such as raw 
materials in inventory, cash on hand for operations, and receivables. 
Asset costs can be particularly high for those companies producing 116     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
a product, but even some service companies may need long-term 
assets, such as trucks and equipment, which need to be replaced as 
they wear out, or IT equipment, which needs to be replaced when 
it gets obsolete. Y ou therefore need to be able to cover replacement 
costs if your venture is to be sustainable. Replacement costs are 
included in the annual budget as depreciation over the expected 
lifespan of the long-term asset.
  Note that long-term assets should be budgeted for in anticipation 
of a successful business three to five years out. We strongly discourage  
your purchasing long-term assets at start-up, unless it is impossible  to 
borrow, rent, or lease them. All that early purchasing does is deplete 
your funds and increase the cost of failing if you cannot make your 
business work. Once your business is up and running, and generating 
reliable returns, you can consider purchasing long-term assets.
  Let’s take a look at the Asset Funding table for Zambia Feeds 
(Table 10.4) on pages 118-119.
  To break down the table:
 •  The Asset Funding table takes the Deliverables table (Table 10.1) 
as a base and expands it.
 •  In the “Investment required” (column E), we have simply listed 
any step in the Deliverables table where funding will be required. 
For instance, Ilona will have to keep inventory on hand to satisfy 
unexpected orders from distribution centers, and she may need 
a truck, if none is available to rent, to deliver product and pick up 
raw materials.
 •  In the “Investment amount required” column (F), we list the 
estimate of the investment needed, and in the “Basis of estimate” 
column (G), we list the basis of this estimate. For instance, Ilona 
believes that she will need to have 10 days’ inventory as a buffer 
against delays in supply of materials. This represents 10/365 
times sales of $417,000 in inventory, or $11,425 worth of raw 
materials.
 •  Ilona’s first-cut estimate for the total investment at the bottom Specify Deliverables      117
of the “Investment amount required” column (F) is just north of 
$190,000. Again, since this is an uncertain project, we flag and 
number all these estimates as assumptions in the “ Assumption 
number” column (H), to be revisited as the plan gets under way 
and we redirect the project.
 •  The “Potentially funded by” column (I) lists the sources of 
funding that Ilona envisages approaching to get her project 
funded. Note that if the financing costs (such as interest to the 
banks) for this project are 15%, the total financing costs will be 
$28,691 ($191,274 x 15%), which must come out of Ilona’s $52,000 
estimate to cover all administrative, financing, distribution, and 
overhead costs. This leaves her with only $23,309 ($52,000 – 
$28,691) for administrative, distribution, and overhead. Again, 
we would push hard for her to think through how to drive down 
the investment requirements. Ilona was aware of these costs and 
managed to eliminate a number of them by starting out as an 
intrapreneurial venture and persuading her parent firm to absorb 
costs for the period of start-up. This “piggy-back” strategy allowed 
her to minimize her overhead and financing expenses until such 
time as the venture had grown sufficiently to afford them.
  With respect to long-term assets, there are two primary consid-
erations: first, the up-front expense of a long-term asset, and second, 
the replacement or upkeep expense of the asset. Assets must be 
acquired, appropriately depreciated over time, and ultimately 
replaced when worn out. The up-front costs must be secured, and 
the replacement assets planned for. Based on Table 10.4, Ilona will 
need at least $191,272 to pay for the assets required to operate her 
venture as planned. Remember that if she secures funding from 
investors, the investors will require a share of profits. This share must 
be accounted for ahead of time. If Ilona had raised debt, the interest 
of the debt would have needed to be paid in a timely manner. This 
expense would need to have been added to the table.118     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
Table 10.4: Asset Funding Table for Zambia Feeds 
Column A Column B Column C Column D Column E
     Investment
 Equipment  Staff  Materials required
Final mix stored in bags    Guards  Inventory Inventory
at distribution center    (short-term asset)  
Transportation to Truck  Drivers   Truck 
distribution center    (long-term asset)
Mixing and Mixing plant, Mixers, baggers   Spare parts, Plant
bagging bagging plant   bags (long-term asset)
Bag storage Warehouse Guards  Warehouse
    (long-term asset)
Raw materials Warehouse Guards Raw materials Inventory
    (short-term asset)
Raw materials Warehouse Guards  Warehouse
storage    (long-term asset)
Transportation of raw Trucks Drivers  Truck
materials to plant    (long-term asset)
Finished goods Bags/warehouse Guards Raw materials, Inventory
inventory   bags (short-term asset)
  In Ilona’s case, there must also be a certain level (as low as 
possible) of inventory available for customers in the event that they 
fail to plan well or have a mishap with their feed.
Interpreting the Numbers
Getting to an as-accurate-as-possible projected income statement 
requires some diligent planning and number crunching. The exercise 
is well worth it, however, because it is a pragmatic way to assess the 
viability of your venture before you commit people and capital. 
  Note: Table 10.4 continues across opposite page.Specify Deliverables     119
 Column F Column G Column H Column I
 Investment amount  Basis of Assumption Potential
 required  estimate  number funded by
 $11,425 10 days’ sales 10 Bank
 
 
 $12,000 Truck company 11 Investors
  estimate
 
 $80,000 Ilona’s estimate 12 Investors
 $5,000 Builder’s estimate 13 Investors
 $40,000 Ilona’s estimate of 14 Investors/bank
  10% of revenue
 $22,849 20 days’ sales 15 Bank
 See above: Ilona’s estimate 16 Investors
only one truck needed
 $20,000 Ilona’s estimate of 17 Investors/bank
  5% of revenue 
 TOTAL: $191,274
  This step is really the first time you are comparing your projected 
revenues with projected costs. Generally, the numbers will put your 
proposed venture into one of three categories:
 •  Viable venture . Y our projected operating costs are 20% less than 
your projected revenues. (Y ou will make a surplus). This may be 
a viable venture. But don’t get too excited yet; you are still in the 
very early stages of your venture and there is a lot more testing to 
be done.120     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
 •  Questionable venture . Y our projected operating costs are close 
to (within 20% of) your projected revenues. It’s difficult to make 
a go/no-go decision here. This scenario is quite common. It 
is here where we advise that you think creatively (spend your 
imagination before your funds) about how you might do what is 
required for less. That’s why in the chapter that follows we look 
at a “sensitivity analysis. ” This allows you to see which variables 
you can least afford to be wrong about and which you can afford 
to overlook temporarily.
 •  View-with-concern venture . Y our projected operating costs are 
close to or greater than projected revenues. In other words, there 
will be more money going out than coming in. It doesn’t take 
an accountant to realize this is not a good idea. We get really 
concerned with such ventures, and if you can’t innovatively 
lower costs or increase revenues, then this is not a viable for-
profit venture. At this point, you might consider scrapping the 
idea, or turning it into a nonprofit and bridging the gap with 
donations and grants. In this way the idea is not lost and there is 
still a chance to positively affect the beneficiaries for whom the 
venture was planned. 
Chapter Checklist
Following the processes outlined in this chapter, you will have:
 m   Revisited the Deliverables table for your enterprise, identified 
the cost drivers of the deliverables required, and estimated the 
operating costs.
 m   Established a projected income statement allowing you to 
compare the projected revenue with the projected costs of run-
ning the venture.
 m   Outlined the costs of maintaining and renewing assets (any 
durable assets such as trucks or equipment) that will require 
up-front investment.Specify Deliverables      121
 m   Identified potential sources of funding for your operations and 
the acquisition and maintenance of assets.
Tough Love Test
If you answer no to any of the following questions, you should 
seriously reconsider your idea. If you answer no three times or more, 
you should drop the idea. It simply won’t be worth your time and 
resources if you cannot surmount the challenges at this early stage. If 
you answer yes to all the following questions, by all means, continue 
on to the next chapter.
 1.   Does your Deliverables table contain a detailed description of 
all operations requirements necessary to deliver your solution 
to your beneficiaries?
 2.   Have you tested your concept with your beneficiaries and 
received real evidence of their willingness to participate?
 3.   Is the total of your estimated operating costs at least 20% lower 
than your calculated maximum allowable costs?
 4.   Are your estimated operating and asset replacement costs 
lower than your calculated maximum allowable costs?
 5.   When the costs of your assets and your funding costs are 
included in your income statement, are they lower than your 
projected revenues?
 6.   Have you discussed your funding aspirations with represent-
atives of the funding sources and received a positive response?Establish Assumptions  
and Checkpoints
123CHAPTER 11
In the previous chapter, you laid out the expected activities and 
estimated costs associated with running your business. These 
estimated numbers are assumptions. Assumptions are simply best-
guess estimates that you use perforce until you can test them. In this 
chapter we offer the procedure you should follow for managing and 
testing assumptions prior to making large resource commitments in 
the face of your uncertainty.
  At the start of any highly uncertain venture, you simply don’t 
know much about many aspects related to the success you have in 
mind. Therefore, the assumptions you need to make relative to the 
knowledge you have are considerable. We call this the assumption-
to-knowledge ratio. In DDP , or discovery-driven planning, plan 
execution is organized around converting highly sensitive assump-
tions to knowledge as soon as possible, and at the lowest possible 
cost. This helps ensure that if you are dangerously wrong in your 
assumptions, you can find out and fix things; or if you can’t redirect, 
you can abandon your plan quickly at low cost. This way, even if 
uncertainty is high and the probability of potential failure is daunting, 
the cost of failing is kept low.
Identifying and Documenting Assumptions
The first step is to identify and document, in a consolidated list, 
all your assumptions. Doing so requires that you revisit the major 
assumptions you have made so far.124     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
  Note that we are not looking here at your initial start-up 
numbers, but at what you expect (in fact, require) your enterprise 
to be doing once you have gotten through the initial challenges and  
are operating at a steady rate—that is, delivering a steady flow of 
benefits. This could be three to five years after your launch.
Operations Assumptions 
Y ou begin with assumptions derived from your Deliverables table in 
chapter 6. Here are some examples:
 • Costs of raw materials and supplies
 •  Number and types of employees required, and their remuneration 
costs
 •  Necessary inventory and receivables (though we strongly dis-
courage receivables)
 • Cash required to reach cash break-even
 • Preferred profit margins
 • Cost of the essential equipment you need
 • Cost of maintaining and replacing equipment
  To reacquaint yourself with the kinds of assumptions you have 
made, go back through the earlier chapters where you made and 
documented estimates about your target market (chapters 2–5), the 
required capabilities of your beneficiary (chapter 6), your required 
capabilities (chapter 6), your operational costs (chapter 6), the 
sociopolitical realities on the ground (chapter 7), and the size and 
scope of your business (chapter 9).
  From these revisits, create a running assumption checklist, 
updating it as new knowledge becomes available. Examples of assump-
tions might include pricing estimates from a potential customer, 
materials or equipment or other input costs provided by a potential 
supplier, and a labor cost estimate provided by a technician. To get a 
sense of how this looks, see the simple stylized assumption checklist 
template in Table 11.1. Establish Assumptions and Checkpoints      125
  The “ Assumption description” identifies what you are assuming—
for example, the various major costs, the number of beneficiaries, 
and the price you think you can expect. The “Relevant assumption 
value” is where you put your current best estimate for the relevant 
assumption. The “Source” column documents where and when you 
got or updated the relevant assumption value. A source may be an 
industry report, a market trial, an expert’s estimate, competitive 
intelligence, or simply your best guess. This column serves as a 
constant reminder that your assumptions are not facts, but rather, 
estimates from sources with varying levels of reliability/credibility. 
Remain vigilant against the tendency over time to forget that 
assumptions made early on in planning are neither real nor facts. Y ou 
do not want to learn too late that the actual reality is uncomfortable 
at best and disastrous at worst.
  As you go through this process, and as you begin to uncover new 
knowledge, you may find yourself redirecting your original plan in 
order to pursue the actual opportunity emerging from what you are 
learning. Be aware that a redirected plan may end up quite different 
from your original concept.Table 11.1: Assumption Checklist Template26
Assumption  Assumption  Relevant 
number description assumption value Source 
1 Market size Expected number of  Chapter 2 market study/field
  beneficiaries  research
2 Demand Expected revenues from  Chapter 2 market study/field
  expected number of  research
  beneficiaries
3 Price $ (your currency)/unit Field research/competitors 
   (if any)/preliminary market   
   tests
4 Costs Materials, labor, Field research/secondary 
  equipment, etc. research/proxy industry data126     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
  Let’s return to the Zambia Feeds case. Ilona soon learned that the 
assumptions she had made about raw materials reliability, product 
spoilage, and finance cost had been too optimistic. Her initial 
estimates proved to be wrong, and in the wrong direction from 
the actual costs, once she launched the business. Fortunately, by 
having identified her vulnerability to her assumptions early on, and 
by developing and baking in disciplined management monitoring 
processes, she was able to spot these discrepancies and reconfigure 
her operations and product formulations to reduce the negative 
impact of emergent outcomes. For instance, having flagged the 
vulnerability of her profits to raw material costs, she developed a 
rig-orous purchase inspection process and management practices 
to monitor and manage the purchase and storage of raw materials, 
particularly soybeans and corn. After discovering that bags of corn  
she had purchased contained relatively high levels of sand, she ensured 
that, thereafter, all soybean and corn purchases would be sampled 
and checked prior to acceptance. This added an inspection cost to the 
business but greatly reduced losses due to shipment tampering.
  The discovery of flaws in assumptions is a normal consequence 
of operating in the high-uncertainty environments of social entre-
preneurship. The process outlined in this chapter will allow you to 
identify and monitor those assumptions that matter most to your 
planned venture.
  As your plan evolves, review your original assumptions, seeing 
where they did not pan out and where and how you should adjust 
your plan. At this point, go to your advisory group and other 
knowledgeable people in the field and have them weigh in on your 
assumptions, then change them if you agree with their advice. The 
whole idea is to use the assumption table as a tool, both for yourself 
and to extract advice from experts you respect. Be willing to change 
your plan while there is still little invested. Do not be defensive about 
your original plan; under high-uncertainty conditions, most plans 
change from the original concept.Establish Assumptions and Checkpoints      127
  Y ou need to learn early, and on the cheap, if your idea, or part of 
it, is not nearly as attractive as you thought it was. If it isn’t, abandon 
it at low effort and low cost. This approach allows you to redirect 
your efforts and resources to other, more plausible opportunities.
  Note the use of “proxy industry data” for assumption number 4 
in Table 11.1. Y ou will frequently find it difficult to obtain accurate 
data for key variables. When this happens, get a rough estimate from 
a similar, or proxy, industry in another location. For example, when 
planning her poultry project in Zambia, Ilona used nutrition data 
from both the U.S. and South African poultry industries, aware that 
this data was wrong but not an order-of-magnitude wrong.
  Alternatively, relevant data from a different industry in the same 
location—such as drivers’ wages in, say, the construction or mining 
industry—could be a proxy for drivers’ wages in food transportation. 
Use such proxies as a starting point—knowing the data are not 
accurate but are at least in the ballpark—and refine by testing them 
as your venture develops.
Identifying the Most Important Assumptions:  
A Sensitivity Analysis
As you probe and recast your assumptions, it will become clear 
that some of them are highly uncertain, and therefore difficult or 
impossible to predict. Y ou and those advising you are likely to be 
uncomfortable estimating a single value for them. Here you should 
estimate the range  of possible values by asking people most in the 
know to estimate both the worst and the most optimistic values. The 
more uncertain they are, the greater this range will be. For example, 
suppliers might estimate that raw materials costs could be as low as 
$15 in a good year, but as high as $25 in a bad year. Alternatively, your 
potential banker may not be comfortable suggesting a single foreign 
exchange rate estimate for a full year. Rather, she might suggest that, 
in previous years, the rate was as low as 5 to 1 and as high as 7 to 1.128     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
  These ranges allow you to do a sensitivity analysis, which 
determines your exposure to being wrong for each assumption. Do 
this by formulating likely and worst-case values for each assumption, 
then find out which assumptions cause you the greatest exposure to 
being wrong. Knowing the impact if a worst-case scenario occurs, 
and its likelihood, can protect you from nasty surprises later on. Also Table 11.2: Deliverables Table for Zambia Feeds—  
Likely and Worst-Case Estimates 
Column A Column E Column F Column G
 Likely pro rata Source of Assumption
 cost estimate* estimate number
Transportation of raw 2.0% % of revenues based on 1
materials to plant  typical Zambia industry cost  
Raw materials storage 1.5% % of revenues based on  2
  typical Zambia industry cost  
Raw materials $11.00 Ilona estimate using 3
(cost/bag)  South African data
Bags $0.50 Suppliers 4
Mixing and 10.0% % of revenues— 5
bagging  Ilona estimate 
Finished product 1.5% % of revenues based on  6
storage  typical Zambia industry cost 
Transportation to 2.0% % of revenues based on  7
distribution center  typical Zambia industry cost
Final mix stored in bags  1.5% % of revenues based on  8
at distribution center  typical Zambia industry cost
    
Administration, 10.0% Typical South African 9
financing, overhead,   industry cost
distribution, rent
*  Examples: per unit sold, percentage of revenues or budget, per month or year, per 
person, per mile, per ton, per square foot, and so on.
Note: Table 11.2 continues across opposite page.Establish Assumptions and Checkpoints      129
 Column H Column I Column J Column K  
   Worst-case pro rata Worst-case
 Cost multiplier Cost estimate cost estimate* cost estimate
 $250,000 $10,400 3.5% $18,200
 $520,000 $7,800 2.0% $10,400
 26,000 $286,000 $13,000 $338,000
 26,000 $13,000 $0.75 $19,500
 $520,000 $52,000 12.0% $62,400
 $520,000 $7,800 2.0% $10,400
 $520,000 $10,400 3.0% $15,600
 $520,000 $7,800 2.0% $10,400
 
 $520,000 $52,000 12.0% $62,400
think about what you could do if the worst case happened, and put 
in place early-indicator signals that it is happening. We’ll illustrate 
the likely and worst-case scenario idea with the Zambia Feeds case 
(Table 11.2).
  We used Deliverables tables from chapter 6 as the basis for this 
table. We consider the cost estimate (column I in Table 11.2) to be 
the likely value for each of the assumptions in the spreadsheet. In 
your version of Table 11.2, add what you believe to be the worst-case 
values for the assumptions (columns J and K). The worst-case value 130     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
is the value you currently believe to be the worst possible outcome for 
that specific assumption, based on the research you have conducted. 
Y ou now have a range of possible values for each assumption from 
the likely case to the worst case. 
  Now let us consider the implications of each assumption on the 
income statement of Zambia Feeds.
  Note that the forecast profit of $72,800 and forecast target 
profitability (ROS) of 14% both meet the minimums required in the 
DDP frame in chapter 9 ($65,000 and 12.5%, respectively). Now, in 
Table 11.3, consider the impact of having the worst case happen for 
selling price/bag ($18.50) on the profit forecast. This brings profits 
down to $33,800, which is a reduction of 53.37%. If Ilona discovered 
that her customers/beneficiaries would pay only $18.50 per bag 
of feed, the net result would be a 54% reduction in profits, all else 
being equal. Note also the dramatic effect of raw materials costs: 
should Ilona discover that raw materials cost $13 per bag rather 
than $11 per bag, she can expect to see a 71% negative impact on 
forecast profits, all else being equal. Obviously, she should be deeply 
concerned about her ability to consistently procure raw materials at 
a price closer to $11 per bag (or less).
  In the Zambia Feeds example, Ilona is able to rank the assumptions 
according to impact on outcome, thereby focusing on only those few 
assumptions that have greatest impact on her venture. This allows her 
to ignore, for the time being, the (many more) relatively less important 
variables. Therefore, her assumptions priorities would be ordered:
 1.  Raw materials (cost/bag)
 2.  Selling price/bag
 3.  Mixing and bagging
 4.  Administration, financing, overhead, distribution, rent
 5.  Transportation of raw materials to plantEstablish Assumptions and Checkpoints      131
Table 11.3: Zambia Feeds Project
Deliverables specification/ A B C D E
assumptions Likely cost  Worst Profit Profit Impact
 estimate case (US$) (%) rank
Selling price/bag $20.00 $18.50 $33,800 -53.57% 2
 
Transportation of raw  $10,400 $18,200 $65,000 -10.71% 5
materials to plant
 
Raw materials storage $7,800 $10,400 $70,200 -3.57% 8
 
Raw materials $286,000 $338,000 $20,800 -71.43% 1
Bags $13,000 $19,500 $66,300 -8.93% 6
 
Mixing and bagging  $52,000 $62,400 $62,400 -14.29% 3
Finished product storage  $7,800 $10,400 $70,200 -3.57% 8
Transportation to  $10,400 $15,600 $67,600 -7.14% 7
distribution center 
Final mix stored in bags at  $7,800 $10,400 $70,200 -3.57% 8
distribution center
 
Administration, financing,  $52,000 $62,400 $62,400 -14.29% 3
overhead, distribution, rent
TOTAL ESTIMATED COSTS $447,200
FORECAST PROFIT $72,800 Worst-case impact onRequired operating income $65,000
Target number daily protein  1,000,000
servings 
Target profitability (ROS) 12.5%
Required revenues $520,000
Allowable costs $455,000
Estimated selling price/bag $20.00
Required bags of feed sold  26,000132     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
  Conduct this exercise for each of the assumptions for your 
venture and rank each assumption in order of its impact on your 
venture. Typically about five to eight of your worst-case assumptions 
will have a huge negative impact on performance; most of the others 
will have only limited impact. In fact, if you have more than eight 
high-impact assumptions, we would be seriously worried about the 
vulnerability of your venture.
  Though it is a little tedious to do the worst-case calculations 
in a spreadsheet, it is a lot better than being sideswiped in real life. 
No one wants to fail after having poured in huge effort and serious 
investment. As your venture unfolds and the accuracy of your 
assumptions becomes clearer, use your calculator or spreadsheet to 
systematically update your plan and identify the assumptions that 
matter most.
  Y ou can also do sensitivity analyses using more sophisticated 
methods, such as Monte Carlo simulations. Once you have con-
ducted your sensitivity analysis (manually or using Excel Solver or a 
Monte Carlo analysis), you will know which assumptions are likely 
to have the most impact on your proposed business model. Y ou can 
therefore decide which to test first. Do this by designing and then 
using a sequence of checkpoints as laid out in the next section.
Designing Checkpoints to Test the Most  
Sensitive Assumptions
Checkpoints are progress points or events that you deliberately 
design to test the most sensitive assumptions in your business 
plan. Types of checkpoints range from doing market and feasibility 
studies, to launching small pilot programs, to building a model 
or prototype. Checkpoints are important because they force you 
systematically to test and learn about critical assumptions before 
committing significant resources. They also help ensure that you do 
not treat assumptions as facts. Be warned: treating assumptions as Establish Assumptions and Checkpoints      133
facts happens more frequently than you imagine—sometimes with 
catastrophic effects.
Designing Checkpoints
To develop a set of checkpoints, first think about ways to test your 
assumptions at major events in preparation for and during the launch 
and growth of your project. Start with the high-impact assumptions 
from your sensitivity analysis. Once you have identified them, think 
of checkpoints (such as market studies, feasibility analyses, or pilot 
programs) where you can begin to test these key assumptions. For 
the high-impact assumptions, you should have multiple checkpoints, 
starting perhaps with inexpensive, rough-and-ready tests. Then, 
as you reduce the uncertainty of your assumptions and increase 
confidence, you “earn” the right to spend more in order to get better 
estimates of the value of the assumptions.
  Different types of businesses will have different checkpoints. 
Tables 11.4 and 11.5 on the following pages contain typical check-
point templates for a manufacturing business (11.4) versus a service 
business (11.5).27  Further on in the chapter, we will look at project-
specific examples.
   The goal in designing checkpoints is to obtain the most 
information for the least amount of money. For example, if you 
are a software developer, it makes more sense (and is significantly 
less expensive) to use rapid prototyping to test usability by putting 
“friendly” users in front of a prototype with modest functionality, 
than to fully build out the software before putting it in front of hard-
nosed customers or investors.
  In the first part of this chapter, we introduced the idea of dev-
eloping a list of assumptions. We then talked about how to identify 
key assumptions—those that can make or break your business. Now 
you need to decide at which checkpoints you will test (and retest) 
your key assumptions, and enter them into the most important 134     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
planning document: a Checkpoints and Assumptions table. The goal 
here is to have one table that specifies which assumptions will be 
tested at which checkpoint—keeping in mind that very important 
assumptions will be tested more than once.
  If you look at our sample Checkpoints and Assumptions table 
(Table 11.6 on page 136), you will see that every checkpoint tests at 
least one assumption, and every assumption is tested at least once. 
Y ou never want to reach a checkpoint and have no assumptions 
to test—why have the checkpoint? Similarly, you never want to Table 11.4: Checkpoint Template for a Manufacturing Business
Checkpoint Assumption tested
Industry analysis and market study completed Price, market size, and demand potential
Feasibility study done Operating costs (rental, power, etc.), potential 
 returns
Prototype developed Costs, resource availability, development time 
 frame
Initial customer test with focus groups completed Price, product feature demand
Trials with beta users performed Price, demand cycle
Pilot plant completed Capital, raw materials, equipment, labor costs
Pilot marketing campaign completed Price, demand, customer-acquisition costs
Pilot sales recruitment and training done Labor availability, compensation cost
Manufacturing recruitment and training done Labor availability, compensation cost
Plant commissioned Operating costs, productivity
Sales force recruited and trained Labor availability, compensation cost
Product launched Price, key operating costs, customer demand
Initial orders received Price, customer demand, selling costs
First returns received Quality, customer segment needsEstablish Assumptions and Checkpoints      135
Table 11.5: Checkpoint Template for a Service Business
Checkpoint Assumption tested
Industry analysis and market study done Price, market size, and demand potential;
 competitor pricing
Feasibility study done Operating costs (rental, power, etc.), potential  
 returns
Mock-up system or rapid prototype developed Labor costs, development time frame
Initial focus groups on mock-up system Price, service features, demand
testing completed
Human resource and manpower study done Skills availability, costs
Trials with beta users carried out Price, key features, demand
Pilot system development done Costs, development time frame, key skills 
 availability
Test operating system developed Customer demand, operations costs
Pilot sales recruited and trained Skills availability, training costs, compensation
System tested with beta users Service features and costs
Sales and operations staff recruited and Labor costs, skills availability
trained
Initial contracts signed Price, sales cycle, selling costs, demand
Service launched Price, operating costs, sales cycle, demand
have an assumption that is not tested at least once, or you run the 
risk of being very expensively wrong about that assumption. This 
is absolutely crucial in high-uncertainty environments where a 
forgotten assumption such as “market demand” or “transport cost” 
can prove to be the death of a well-intentioned venture. 
  Always design your Checkpoints and Assumptions table so that 
the most sensitive, “showstopper” assumptions are tested earlier 
than less sensitive assumptions and tested more than once.   In addition to the most sensitive, showstopper type of assumption 
is a hypercritical type of assumption we call the go/no-go assumption. 
It is similar to a showstopper, but different in that if you are wrong 
about it, it will preclude your launching your venture at all or halt it 
suddenly and unexpectedly. For example, if Khaya Cookie Company 
could not get approval from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA), it would be unable to sell in the U.S. market, regardless of the 
quality of its product or the appeal of its packaging.
  Often, go/no-go assumptions are regulatory or legal in nature, 
such as work permits for key employees or a license to operate. Try 
to resolve go/no-go issues before you incur substantial expenses 
and/or have customers expecting deliveries only to have their orders 
held up by the authorities.
  Now let’s look at an example of the Zambia Feeds project’s 
checkpoints and assumptions in Table 11.6.
  At checkpoints A, B, and C, Ilona called and visited farmers, 
vendors, and local markets to get a sense of the prices chickens were 
being sold for and the costs of rearing them. This provided her with 136     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
Table 11.6: Zambia Feeds Checkpoints and Assumptions 
 Checkpoint Assumption tested
A Historical poultry price analysis report complete,  Market price
 historical mixed feed sales report completed
B Historical price analysis report complete,  Feed cost
 historical raw materials prices report completed
C Cost/price financial model completed Market price, feed cost, site rental, labor 
  estimates, transportation estimates
D Hand-mixed feed sample  shipment sent to  Market price, feed costs, transportation 
 test region costs
E Bulk hand-mixing pilot phase completed Market price, feed costs, labor costs, 
  delivery costsEstablish Assumptions and Checkpoints      137
fundamental insights into what it would take for small-scale farmers 
to rear poultry and sell the chickens at local markets.
  At checkpoint D, Ilona hired six part-time workers to mix feed 
by hand on a concrete floor inside a shed. The mixed and bagged 
product was delivered to customers in the test region. They, in turn, 
reared and sold their chickens. By means of a profit-share incentive 
with the parent firm, Ilona negotiated free use of the shed until there 
was sufficient evidence that the business could be scaled. Once the 
key assumptions of market price, feed costs, and labor costs had been 
approximately validated she was able to continue with her venture.
  At checkpoint E, Ilona convinced two dozen individuals in 
nearby villages to spend six weeks rearing a batch of chicks, which 
she supplied. In exchange for their investment commitment—
early farmers used savings or borrowed funds—she guaranteed 
them sufficient feed and consulting assistance during the growing 
cycle. Once the chickens reached maturity at six weeks, the farmers 
transported them to the local cash market and were delighted to 
receive a healthy profit of nearly $1.00 per bird. Ilona had thereby  
tested a bigger “bulk” production run and gathered more information 
on market prices and feed costs. Notice the pattern of learning at 
low expense and the subsequent commitment to larger venture 
investments only when important assumptions are converted to 
knowledge.
The Checkpoint Review Process
As your venture progresses, you will need to refine your assumptions 
by deliberately testing and improving them at the major checkpoints 
you set up. The first step in this process is to list all the assumptions 
you have made so far. Armed with this list, begin eliciting reactions 
from people knowledgeable about similar markets, products, factory 
owners, retailers, etc., asking them to weigh in on the reasonableness 
of your assumptions; or by calling potential customers or suppliers 138     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
and probing them for their reactions. If anyone expresses concern, 
find out why. Ask them to suggest alternatives, and their reasoning 
behind their alternatives. Often just a few phone calls or personal 
discussions with potential beneficiaries, distributors, suppliers, 
or industry experts can provide critical information about your 
assumptions. These kinds of informational checks cost little and can 
prevent huge, costly errors.
  At each checkpoint, discuss with your advisory group what you 
have learned and the extent to which you need to revise your venture. 
Ask questions such as:
 •  What did we originally hope to achieve at this checkpoint and 
what actually happened?
 •  Why did it happen and what have we learned?
 •  Do we need to redesign our offering? Can the objectives be 
accomplished or should we revise them?
 •  Have new opportunities been uncovered?
 •  What do we need to test at the next checkpoint, and what funding 
and time will it take to move to the next checkpoint?
 •  Important: each checkpoint, revisit your Stakeholder Impact 
table from chapter 7 and see how it has changed. If it has 
meaningfully done so, revisit your sociopolitical strategy and 
update your Tactics table (discussed in chapter 7). 
Moving On
If, after testing your key assumptions, your idea continues to have 
positive prospects, move on to the formal launch and piloting 
phase: phase three. This will take your project from probable to 
plannable. We view a pilot as the first on-the-ground practical test 
of a business case. Be as parsimonious as possible with your pilot. 
With imagination, pilots can often be done cheaply and quickly. For 
instance, don’t build an entire school when you can rent a room and 
start a pilot course with just one class of students.Establish Assumptions and Checkpoints      139
  In the case of Khaya Cookie Company, Polak negotiated the use 
of an unoccupied community building with a large kitchen with 
idle ovens, rather than buy a building and bakery equipment. As 
we saw, Ilona first hand-mixed the feeds by means of a shovel team 
rather than buying mixing equipment; later, she used secondhand 
equipment before buying new equipment.
  With your Checkpoints and Assumptions table fleshed out, now 
turn to phase three and begin to pilot your venture.
Chapter Checklist
Following the processes outlined in this chapter, you will have:
 m   Identified and documented your assumptions.
 m   Identified the assumptions that have the greatest impact on 
your venture.
 m   Developed a Checkpoints and Assumptions table designed to 
test no more than 10 most important assumptions.
 m   Structured your checkpoints in keeping with the philosophy of 
learning at low expense (converting assumptions to knowledge) 
before committing to large investments.
 m   Made sure you have a process for updating your Stakeholder 
Impact table and modifying your Tactics table, which was 
discussed in chapter 7, in the face of unfolding sociopolitical 
realities.
Tough Love Test
If you answer no to any of the following questions, you should 
seriously reconsider your idea. If you answer no three times or more, 
you should drop the idea. It simply won’t be worth your time and 
resources if you cannot surmount the challenges at this early stage. 
If you answer yes to all the questions, by all means, continue on to 
phase three.
 1.   Does your list of assumptions contain a clear description of all 140     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
currently known assumptions necessary to deliver your solution 
to its beneficiaries? Has this been affirmed by your advisors?
 2.   Have you identified the most sensitive assumptions, the ones 
that give you maximum vulnerability?
 3.   Have you designed a Checkpoints and Assumptions table, 
initially with no more than five checkpoints, designed to test 
the 10 most import-ant assumptions? Does it comply with the 
mantra of “investing a little to learn a lot”?
 4.   Have you come up with the lowest possible cost means to 
roughly validate your most important assumptions—in other 
words, are you working on inexpensive ways of being roughly 
right rather than expensive ways of being precisely wrong?
 5.   Do you have a process for ensuring that you revisit and 
update your Stakeholder Impact table at each checkpoint? Is 
it necessary to update your sociopolitical strategy? Does your 
updated sociopolitical strategy reflect the current realities, and 
are you confident that you can manage the sociopolitics? PHASE THREE
From Probable to Plannable: 
Launch and Scale Your 
Social EnterpriseLaunch Your Enterprise
143CHAPTER 12
In phase one, you took your start-up idea from possible to 
plausible, and pressure-tested it. Y ou selected your initial target 
market segment and formed an advisory group for your venture. In 
phase two, you took your venture from plausible to probable, and 
created a DDP , or discovery-driven plan. Then you identified the 
most sensitive assumptions in your plan, and designed a systematic 
method of testing them at predetermined checkpoints. Y ou now 
have done all the due diligence needed to move to phase three and 
take your venture from probable to plannable. Y our venture is ready 
for a controlled launch. 
  A controlled launch is the formal initiation of commercial 
enterprise operations, in a way that: 
  • Prioritizes learning ahead of investment, 
  • Minimizes initial investments and costs, 
  • Postpones the acquisition of assets for as long as possible, and
  •  Allows for project redirection as you learn more about on-the-
ground realities.
 
  There’s some inevitable repetition from prior chapters in the 
first section of this chapter. This is because the process of forging 
opportunity out of uncertainty is iterative and cyclical, driven by 
intelligent experimentation and deliberate learning. 
Preparing the Ground
In order to get your project off the ground, we will walk you through 
two key preparative procedures: identifying the skills you need and 144     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
thinking about how to minimize your early investment to minimize 
risk.  Let’s start with identifying skills.
Skill-up for Start-up
First, make sure you have the staffing to launch your enterprise. We 
don’t mean assembling a vast number of people, but, perhaps initially, 
on a part-time basis, enough people with the skills that are absolutely 
essential to get your new enterprise started. In our experience, at 
least four skills are needed to get an enterprise going:
 •  Selling skills.  Make sure at least one member of your team is 
skilled at securing sales. The type of sale that needs to be made 
is not simply order taking, but convincing (perhaps) dubious 
purchasers that your offer is worth their risk and support. 
Any new enterprise is a risky business at best, and potential 
supporters—such as customers or beneficiaries, potential allies, 
and needed indifferents from your stakeholder analysis—can 
be forgiven for being circumspect about supporting something 
entirely new. Y ou will need at least one person on your team who 
is effective at persuading prospective supporters. The salesperson 
should be deeply aware of the perceived risks—in the minds of 
the potential customer or beneficiary—and be able to think of 
ways to help the beneficiaries risk making those critical first few 
orders. A smart “missionary” salesperson is able to find ways of 
underwriting the perceived risk for that seed beneficiary. If you 
do not have someone capable of securing essential support for 
your enterprise, you will struggle to make those sales, and thus 
will generate no revenues, and the project will be hampered, 
if not doomed, from the start. Y ou may need to lean on your 
advisory board to help you find somebody who can secure those 
sales or help you do it yourself.
 •  Operating skills.  The ability to manage operations—with 
particular emphasis on meeting schedules and planning—and 
maintain quality of your output is cruci al. Y ou need somebody Launch Your Enterprise      145
to take charge of operations, someone who can pay attention 
to detail and make absolutely sure that everything—from the 
ordering of materials through the production of product through 
the storage of finished goods—is tightly under control and not a 
target of pilfering or sloppy work leading to low-quality products. 
This kind of talent is often scarce and expensive. Y ou may need 
to budget money and time to train and develop suitable staff.
 •  Accounting and cash flow management skills.  Cash flow 
crises are prime killers of start-ups, and almost every new 
enterprise comes under intense cash flow pressure. In fact, even 
an enterprise that is doing very well and growing can quickly 
experience cash flow pressures because of the need to build 
inventory and receivables ahead of growing demand. Be sure 
that there is someone on your team capable of and responsible 
for monitoring and managing cash flow.
 •  Negotiating skills.  In our experience, for every new enterprise, 
there are between three and five mission-critical negotiations 
whose outcomes will fundamentally imprint the success of the 
enterprise. If the negotiator does a bad job, it will cripple your 
performance for a long, long time. Prior to the launch, review 
your Deliverables table to identify the most critical negotiations 
on the horizon—ones where you’ll have to cut a feasible deal for 
the operation to work at all. Let’s look at negotiation challenges 
in more detail next. 
Three Negotiation Challenges
A successful launch depends on negotiation outcomes. There are 
three key challenges.
 •  If the negotiation does not work, your enterprise dies and the 
other party goes on to do business with others like you.  In a 
social entrepreneurship venture, you are unusually dependent 
on cutting a deal in which you are confident the deal will be 
executed.146     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
 •  Y ou are negotiating from a position of weakness. Spend some 
time thinking through what you absolutely must  get from the 
negotiation for it to be worth your while. When you are in a 
position of weakness, you have some really tough decisions to 
make. First, think about what we call your “walkaway position. ” 
Decide the worst possible deal that you can accept. Go into the 
negotiation with a clear line in your mind. If it’s crossed, walk 
away. If you do not enter the negotiation with a clear idea of your 
walkaway position, you will find yourself conceding way beyond 
what makes sense from a business point of view. In the heat of 
negotiations, and under pressure to get a critical deal done, there 
is an enormous temptation to accept whatever offer is being 
made and then just hope against hope that that “things will work 
out. ” Believe us, things will not work out. 
 •  Prepare for what could go wrong with the execution of the 
deal. Y our initial due diligence and advisory group discussions 
will have put you in a stronger position to do this. Now use what 
you have learned to bake into the deal agreements on how the 
deal will be executed, by whom, and when, and what happens 
afterward. Do all you can to ensure that both parties are clear on 
all the actions and activities each will carry out to uphold its part 
of the deal. Take the example of Zambia Feeds: if your customers 
are waiting for batches of chicks to be delivered to their farms, 
and something goes wrong with the delivery, it is too late now, 
while the feed is spoiling, to start arguing about what the deal 
was with respect to delivery and timing, including penalties for 
nonperformance.
  Important, and related to this problem, is that in many cases 
your start-up venture is of relatively low priority to other, more 
established stakeholders, so in times of stress they will have no 
compunction about making you wait while they pay attention to 
bigger and longer-tenured customers. Launch Your Enterprise      147
  In your key negotiations, it is not just a matter of negotiating 
what prices you will pay; you need to reach ex ante agreements 
on what specifically happens when one party fails to execute, how 
to measure compliance with agreement, and who is going to take 
responsibility for what action if the terms of the contract are not met.
Minimize Early Investment
As you launch your enterprise, you need to be obsessive about 
minimizing early investment and managing cash outflows. The 
person responsible (you or one of your managers/employees) needs 
to be fully on top of cash flow and cash flow projections. In your 
launch phase, make sure you have done everything possible to avoid 
laying out cash before cash comes in. Make sure you don’t buy assets 
when there’s not a revenue stream to justify their purchase, or incur 
high fixed costs when there’s not enough revenue to justify such 
costs. 
  Here are some simple rules to help you minimize initial 
investment: 
 •  Don’t buy equipment if you can rent or lease (or even borrow) 
it. Remember, Ilona started her business in a shed with a 
concrete floor, and with shovels, not with brand-new production 
equipment.
 •  Subcontract production or import products initially, even 
though it costs more per unit. This saves you having to fund 
your own production assets or service delivery system until 
you have unit sales great enough to justify building a complete 
production system. Buy your own plant only when it is evident 
that you can generate sufficient sales to justify such a purchase.
 •  Don’t take on full-time staff, especially relatively expensive 
managers.  Wait until you have evidence that they will be able 
to generate the revenues you need to cover their cost. Until you 
have reliable cash inflows, pay per task completed as opposed to 
paying a fixed income.148     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
 •  Minimize working capital.  Building inventories and receivables 
ties up cash. Try to secure longer times to pay vendors. Avoid or 
minimize selling on credit; this sucks up cash and, furthermore, 
exposes you to collection risk.
 •  As the business gets started, make sure your team knows the 
current daily and weekly break-even sales. For example, if 
weekly break-even sales are 100 units, and by Wednesday your 
sales are only 40 units, your salespeople know they have to get 
out and sell 60 units by Friday. If your break-even sales are 20 per 
day, and by Friday your operations has produced only 85 units of 
adequate quality, everyone knows they will be working through 
the weekend. Y es, the weekend.
Hitting the Start Button
Once you have skilled up, and found ways to minimize your early 
investment, you are ready to launch.
Specify Y our Key Initial Beneficiaries:  
“Naming Y our First Five Customers” 
Think carefully about the characteristics of the first few beneficiaries 
you will sign on. Like an infant in the first few months of life, your 
newborn enterprise will undergo critical early learning. Spend some 
time thinking carefully about who should be the “first five” customers. 
After all, you cannot sell 1,000 units until you have sold the first 100, 
and you cannot sell your first 100 units until you have sold five! And 
it is those first five that are the seeds of the future business.
  We spend time specifying the customers and customer context of 
the first five sales. Who are the important seed beneficiaries in your 
target segment? Describe those first few sales using the guidelines 
that schools of journalism provide to budding journalists. An article 
is incomplete unless it answers six key questions: who, what, where, 
when, why, and how.Launch Your Enterprise      149
 •  Who is going to buy?  Describe your expectations as to your 
buyers’ characteristics: age, gender, education, and any other key 
traits that capture the essence of who you think will be your very 
first beneficiaries.
 •  What are they going to buy?  Here the challenge is to get into 
the beneficiary’s head and specify, along the lines espoused by 
Clayton Christensen and colleagues,28 what the “job” you’re 
offering is going to do for the beneficiaries that would cause 
them to “employ” your product or service rather than something 
else with their extremely limited funds?
 •  Where are they going to buy?  Describe where you think the sale 
will take place.
 •  When are they going to buy?  Describe when you think the sales 
will take place, and with what frequency.
 •  Why are they going to buy from you?  Describe why you 
think they’re going to buy from you and not choose the most 
competitive alternative.
 •  How are they going to buy?  Describe what behavior patterns 
they will follow in making the purchase, and how big their order 
will be. 
  We ask you to do this because when an actual sale takes place, you 
can make a detailed comparison of where the transaction resembles 
or differs from your expectations, and perhaps adjust your selling 
to take into account the new realities. Each sale you make early 
on is an opportunity to consciously and rapidly learn about your 
true customer base and the actual selling conditions. In addition, it 
each enables you to redirect your venture if it looks like your early 
assumptions were incorrect.
  Do yourself a favor by taking the time to assess your first ten or 
so beneficiaries by filling out an Expectations vs. Actual Results table 
(see Table 12.1), then look at any major differences between your 
expectations and the actual results of your marketing efforts.150     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
Table 12.1: Expectations vs. Actual Results for Zambia Feeds Launch
Expected result What Who When
 Quality birds Villager Monthly
 
Actual result
Beneficiary 1: •  Protein for family • Small-scale rural • Bimonthly/
Small-scale  • Means of  villager  each bird cycle
rural villager  generating income   
Beneficiary 2:  • Product performance •  Small-scale • Bimonthly/
Small-scale  •  Quality birds  peri-urban grower  each bird cycle
peri-urban grower  • Income generation     
Beneficiary 3:  • Product performance • Commercial grower • Monthly
Medium-scale  • Quality birds
commercial
  Note the differences among the beneficiary/customer types in 
Table 12.1. For Beneficiary 1, the small-scale rural villager, it soon 
became apparent that the transportation costs of getting feed to the 
beneficiary and the birds to market were too high, thereby compro-
mising beneficiary self-sufficiency. In other words, for Beneficiary 
1 there was simply not enough profit in the production of a bird to 
cover the cost of feed and the total cost of transportation. This led to 
Ilona’s first redirection of Zambia Feeds toward the small-scale peri-
urban grower, extended later on, to the medium-scale commercial 
grower.
  With respect to small-scale peri-urban growers, an eight-week 
shelf life was found to be insufficient as these customers could afford 
to buy feed only once per production cycle (eight weeks) due to the 
fact that sometimes the feed was in the distribution system for two Note: Table 12.1 continues across opposite page.Launch Your Enterprise      151
  Where   Why   How
  Distribution center/   Sell birds   Self-transport
  agent outlet   
• Distribution center • Only feed available rurally • Bicycle
• Agent outlet  • Zambia Feeds consulting • Minibus taxi 
    support
   • Zambia Feeds–supplied 
    chicks
     
• Distribution center •  Quality of product • Bicycle
• Agent outlet  • Technical support •  Minibus taxi
• Delivered by  • Quality of product • Self-collection
 Zambia Feeds if • Consistency and • Zambia Feeds
 road accessible  availability
 (minimum 3 tons)
to four weeks. So Ilona had to modify her feed formulas to meet 
a three-month shelf life requirement to accommodate the buying 
patterns of that particular beneficiary segment. 
  This exercise also proved to be powerfully beneficial to Jaytee’s 
venture, AidsAid. That business observed the reactions of nurses 
and patients to early graphic user interface (GUI) graphs. The 
team’s early expectations were that the EMR system would be 
most useful for patient data management, research, and clinical 
decision-making. However, once patients saw, in graphic format, the 
relationship between treatment adherence and their physical health, 
they began to request to see their charts at each visit. Physicians and 
nurses discovered that they could more easily persuade patients to 
adhere to treatment regimens with the aid of patient charts. This 
was a powerful development; however, it was neither predicted nor 
planned for. 152     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
Relentlessly Deliver Quality
Y ou will almost always have quality problems at the very start, which 
means rework, with the associated higher-than-expected production 
costs.
  A common mistake is for social entrepreneurship start-ups, in 
desperation, to fall prey to the urge to ship out poor-quality product, 
especially under cash flow pressure, when the unexpected costs 
arising from discarding poor quality offerings poses an enormous 
temptation not to do so.
  If your initial sales are unreliable or of low quality in the eyes of 
those pioneer customers “brave” enough to sign up with you, your 
business will be compromised. Y ou need somebody on board making 
sure the products or services you deliver are seen by beneficiaries 
as timely and of high quality. Only this will assuage any concerns 
beneficiaries about the riskiness of doing business with you, and 
they can then perhaps even be used as endorsers.
  Doing something new to the world or new to a particular market 
is a serious challenge. Without a firm idea of what constitutes quality 
in this area, it behooves the person responsible for operations to 
spend time with beneficiaries, who can help flesh out the criteria 
by which the quality of your offering will be judged. Then make 
sure your enterprise delivers that quality, and that beneficiaries 
acknowledge this.
Celebrate Early Successes
If you are having difficulty securing early transactions with 
beneficiaries or when the going gets tough in general, even small 
successes are heartening. It pays to go for early “quick hits. ” Even if 
they are relatively small, they demonstrate that progress is being made. 
Examples of quick hits are trial orders by beneficiaries, validated 
prices, met cost targets, shipment of the first few orders, declarations 
of support by influential members of the community—anything that Launch Your Enterprise      153
can be seen as evidence that your venture is working. Do whatever 
you can to secure early evidence of success, or else run the risk of 
morale declining. Then broadcast it within the organization, reward 
the responsible employees, and seek out the next win.
Aggressively Use Y our Checkpoints and Assumptions Table 
As your venture gains momentum, continue to use your Checkpoints 
and Assumptions table. Here are some tips:
 •  Appoint someone (even yourself) as “keeper of the assump-
tions. ”  This person’s formal responsibility will be to track the 
assumptions and test them at every designated checkpoint. 
This is important. We all get busy, the checkpoints slip by, and 
inadequate or flawed assumptions slip by with them—then 
expensive corrective action must be taken. The most sensitive 
assumptions in particular should be tested. If it turns out that the 
project is off track, get together and replan.
 •  Pressure test learning. As the project unfolds from checkpoint 
to checkpoint, if you find evidence that a critical assumption will 
not pan out, a powerful way to pressure-test your key assumption 
is to design a test to show it is wrong, rather than trying to prove 
it right. This is psychologically tough to do, but if you can find 
inexpensive and early evidence that the business just won’t fly 
because some assumptions are off track, you avoid excessive 
and unnecessary waste of effort and resources. In one project, 
peanut farming by villagers in Malawi, we disengaged very 
early on because of the cost to transport the peanuts from rural 
Malawi to processors in South Africa. The proponents of the 
project had suggested that the export market would be feasible 
and attractive under the right conditions. Our DDP indicated an 
absolute maximum transportation cost that the business could 
profitably bear. As our first pressure test of the proposal, we 
thoroughly investigated all possible transportation alternatives, 154     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
to show that the absolute minimum cost would exceed the deal-
killer maximum allowed. All that it cost us was the time to do 
the DDP and a few lunch meetings with highly knowledgeable 
freight forwarders. 
 •  Treat early sales as inexpensive learning opportunities, not 
as required revenues.  In uncertain environments, your first 
offering in the market should be seen as a sacrificial, or “trainer, ” 
product—a tool to learn about the intended beneficiaries and 
the relevant context. For example, programmers use rapid 
prototypes of software applications as trainer products to 
develop the application further based on user feedback. In the 
AidsAid project, our rapid prototyping beta software version 
was a basic EMR system run off a server hosted locally. As 
additional user requirements (such as electronic reporting and 
graph generation) emerged, the application was built out. In this 
way, our further development was better informed than if the 
programmers had tried to guess up front what the clinic would 
want and be prepared to pay for.
 •  Use after-action reviews. When there are major disconnects 
between your DDP and what actually happened at a checkpoint, 
there is a need for redirection. Every redirection is an opportunity 
to learn from the past what to do better in the future. One way 
of doing this is to conduct an after-action review, which is a 
structured review that analyzes the project to understand what 
happened and why, and to determine what can be done better. 
Regularly Update Y our Discovery-Driven Plan  
and Stakeholder Impact Table
Applying the principles in this chapter should have you on the road 
to the steady state condition you planned for in your DDP . However, 
in the throes of activity in which you find yourself during a launch, 
it is all too easy to fail to revisit and update your DDP and stay Launch Your Enterprise      155
abreast of what is happening with your stakeholders. This is why it is 
important to have the formal “keeper of the assumptions” to update 
the Checkpoints and Assumptions table and revisit the Stakeholder 
Impact table at each checkpoint. 
Chapter Checklist 
After completing the processes outlined in this chapter, you will be 
doing or will have done the following:
 m   Ensured you have access to the key skills you’ll need to start: 
sales, operations, financial and cash flow, and negotiating skills. 
 m   Set up a program to minimize the commitment of funds to 
assets and fixed costs until you have revenues to justify them.
 m   Specified the characteristics of your target “first five” benefi-
ciaries and set up a table to compare your expectations against 
the actual results, and are now analyzing and interpreting the 
differences for planning purposes.
 m   Put in place an operations program that is paying detailed 
attention to cash flow and quality. 
 m   Continued testing assumptions at key checkpoints and redir-
ected (and replanned) the project at any checkpoint where 
there is a significant difference between expected and actual. 
 m   Revisited your Stakeholder Impact table to avoid getting 
blindsided by sociopolitical shifts. 
Tough Love Test
If you answer no to any of the following questions, you might want to 
reconsider your venture strategy before moving ahead. If you answer 
no more than three times, you should seriously consider whether it 
is time to disengage. If you answer yes to all the following questions, 
you are ready to move on to the next chapter.
 1.   Do you have access to the selling, operating, cash flow manage-
ment, and negotiating skills needed to manage the start-up?156     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
 2.   Have you engineered a controlled launch rather than an up-
front commitment of resources to a fixed course of action?
 3.   Have you planned to “earn the right to assets” rather than 
planned to purchase assets before you start?
 4.   Have you planned to “earn the right to fixed costs” rather than 
planned to pay out fixed costs ahead of revenues?
 5.   Do you have effective cash flow and quality monitoring and 
management procedures in place?
 6.   Have you instituted a “keeper of the assumptions” role and 
assigned it to someone whose task is to revisit the DDP and 
Stakeholder Impact table at each checkpoint, calling for a 
replanning session if necessary?Manage the Upside and  
Downside
157CHAPTER 13
Since social enterprises have a high probability of failure, the 
chances are pretty high that you will not be successful, and this 
means that a lot of attention needs to be given to the unpleasant 
but probable downside you could encounter. The problem is that, 
because of the uncertainty in which you operating, it may be hard to 
recognize that you are failing. In this chapter, we look at some of the 
things that will help prevent your continuing to pour resources and 
effort in the vain hope that “things may get better, ” a phenomenon 
Barry Staw called “escalation of commitment. ”29
  We will cover the five things to do to manage the downside of 
your venture:
 •  Have a clear definition of failure at the start;
 •  Regularly monitor your sociopolitical situation;
 •  Preplan for disengagement should things go wrong;
 •  Monitor for the second-order (i.e., unintended) effects of your 
venture’s success or failure; and
 •  Redirect your venture to where true opportunity lies, or launch 
a less sustainable enterprise that still accomplishes humanitarian 
good.
Define Failure
If you are not sure from the get-go what constitutes failure, there 
is every chance that, however well-intentioned, you will just keep 
going on and on with your venture—to no avail. Better to take the 
project off life support and redirect your energy and resources to 158     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
some other project—heaven knows there are needs aplenty. Take 
care to articulate in your D DP , ahead of launch, what you regard 
as failure, using the framing from the planning phase to specify the 
minimum level of revenues and social impact delivered within a 
specified time, below which yo u will declare failure. For example, 
you may draw a line in the sand by saying, “If we are not making 
break-even cash flows and helping at least fifteen hundred people by 
January of such-and-such a year, we shall disengage. ”
Monitor the Sociopolitics
It is absolutely vital that as you launch your venture you keep a close 
eye on the stakeholders you identified in chapter 7. Use the tables 
from that chapter to carefully monitor the early responses from 
each stakeholder group, and consider the implications of responses 
that are different from those you predicted. It is imperative that you 
maintain a close watch on negative impacts and effectively deploy 
your strategies for dealing with them. In cases where you see major 
positive impacts, quickly communicate them to the respective 
stakeholders and use those impacts to validate their support of 
your venture. Confirmation of positive social impact is powerful 
ammunition as you try to mobilize inactive potential allies and 
needed indifferents to support you, and to dissuade or end-run 
inactive primary opponents.
  In the Zambia Feeds case, the overwhelming success by small-
scale growers gave Ilona sufficient support that she was able to 
successfully lobby the government’s Department of Veterinary 
Livestock and Development to allow their veterinary assistants to 
participate in her educational seminars for new poultry growers 
by offering a technical services component (diseases, vaccines, and 
administration of drugs). Once given the opportunity to do so, 
the veterinary assistants not only proved to be willing and able to Manage the Upside and Downside      159
participate, but were important allies in improving poultry rearing 
practices and reducing the perceived risk of the activity in the eyes 
of naïve small-scale farmers.
  In the AidsAid project, by using his connections with an Ivy 
medical school, and their connections with the government, Jaytee 
eventually secured a letter of authorization from a very senior 
official of the health department to develop the EMR system in the 
private clinic. This letter became an invaluable means to navigate the 
complex set of regulations in the country’s health care industry and 
garner support for other necessary allies, such as the private clinic.
Preplan for Disengagement
While we are discussing unpleasant start-up preparation chores, let’s 
look at the most psychologically difficult task, which is to preplan  
how you will disengage from the project in the event that it fails.
  Here we are suggesting something nonintuitive and psycho-
logically very challenging: Give careful thought as to how you intend 
to get out of the project before you even go in. This is tough—at this 
point in your venture you need to be gung-ho and ready to charge 
in, but at the same time you also have to be thinking about how to 
disengage!
  Why? Since the probability of failing is high, the likelihood of 
the need to exit at some point is also high. The combination of high 
probability of exit and vulnerability of beneficiaries at exit suggests 
that social enterprises that anticipate exit will leave their beneficiaries 
better off than those that do not. As a custodian of scarce resources, 
it is prudent that you plan your exit before you even start, so that you 
do not create high dependency on the part of hapless beneficiaries 
and then leave them in the lurch because you do not have the funds 
to continue. The appropriate mind-set here is to plan to leave behind 
“a light footprint” in the event of your exit. 160     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
  Let’s review a few examples:
 •  Zambia Feeds. Although successful in meeting and exceeding 
societal and profitability objectives, Zambia Feeds has endured 
trials and tribulations along the way. Initially the targeted 
markets were small-scale farmers in rural areas. Although the 
target beneficiaries were willing participants, the logistical 
costs and market accessibility challenges made it impossible for 
would-be producers in more remote villages to raise and market 
chickens profitably. When the logistical vulnerability of remote 
village production became apparent in the more remote pilot 
villages, Ilona was able to redirect her efforts to villages closer to 
towns with adequate transportation infrastructure, long before 
the more remote pilots had built significant dependency on  
feed supplies. 
 •  AidsAid. The pilot clinic was successful in delivering higher-
quality patient care to a large number of HIV/AIDS patients and 
meeting the first phase of the project’s social objectives. However, 
Jaytee was unable to identify and establish a viable revenue model, 
ultimately failing to meet his venture’s commercial objectives. 
Throughout the venture, all stakeholders were kept informed as 
to progress, and all data were backed up and stored so that they 
would be transferable in the event of disengagement. During 
the venture, the existing patient management systems were kept 
running in parallel with the new EMR system. This served as a 
fallback: should the project fail, it would be possible to continue 
with the old, manual system at the clinic. It so happened that 
the preservation of the electronic data made it rather simple to 
transfer electronic records to the firm that took over from Jaytee, 
and the handover was pulled off with minimal disruption to 
clinic operations.
 •  Khaya Cookie Company.  Polak’s major attempt at scaling up 
commercial operations to the export markets was unsuccessful. 
However, the first business continues to operate in South Africa, Manage the Upside and Downside      161
supplying a number of hotels, retail stores, and an airline with 
hand-crafted, all-natural baked goods. This seed business has 
retained the majority of its original employees and trained many 
more, and has expanded operations. Polak is now managing a 
nonprofit in San Francisco that trains the unemployed in baking 
skills, and is again using piloting activities to deliver proof of 
concept before embarking on an ambitious expansion program. 
 •  Widows and Orphans Project.  This as yet unmentioned project 
was to train aging widows in small villages—caring for HIV/
AIDS orphans —to rear chickens for an urban distributor. It is 
an example of a failure to prepare adequately for disengagement. 
The original project garnered a lot of attention by the public 
and senior politicians but ultimately failed to deliver the profits 
needed to keep it sustainable. Uncertainties in operations, 
transportation, working capital, and infrastructure proved to be 
large, expensive, and intractable impediments, as did recruiting 
a willing and capable entrepreneur. In spite of great demand 
from the many widows in the chosen region, the project proved 
to be commercially infeasible. Unfortunately, once the team had 
uncovered the magnitude of potential operations losses, the 
project—which had been started with the very best of intentions 
but with no preplanned disengagement—had to be terminated, 
and the women who had been signed up reverted to their former, 
very difficult circumstances. This resulted in significant negative 
publicity for the team, to whom blame for the disappointment 
was directed.
Monitor for Second-Order Effects 
Second-order effects are (sometimes unintended) consequences of 
your venture’s success. Based on our research, there are two types 
worth noting. First are positive effects of the progress of the venture, 
a “societal bonus” (as we shall see, second-order positive effects 162     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
contribute to a venture’s upside). Second are the negative effects this 
progress creates. These may be used by your opponents with inimical 
vested interests to justify their obstruction.
  Let’s review a few examples:
Zambia Feeds
Positive second-order effect: Because of the success of local chicken 
rearing , a number of other organizations, such as churches and 
prisons, have launched “out-grower” schemes, where they help set up 
poultry rearing activities and support the purchase of feeds and the 
sale of fowls by their constituents. These activities provide improved 
nutrition to their communities and also support the activities of 
Zambia Feeds through additional feed purchases. 
Positive second-order effect:  Because Zambia Feeds was able to sell 
increasing quantities of lower-cost, higher-quality feed in its region, 
competitors were eventually obliged to attempt to match Zambia 
Feeds’ cost and quality, so that feed prices in real terms of all 
producers were lower in 2011 than in 2003, and at improved quality 
levels, thereby benefiting all poultry growers and reducing the cost 
of protein to consumers in the whole country, not just the immediate 
and underserved Zambia Feeds region.
Positive second-order effect: As a consequence of the success of 
Zambia Feeds, the poultry industry has expanded rapidly in the 
northwestern region, and in so doing, has spawned investment in 
poultry breeding facilities, distribution centers, and processing 
and packaging facilities, thereby creating economic opportunity 
for individuals as workers, raw material suppliers, and equipment 
service providers.
Negative second-order effect:  Feathers are the only part of a chicken 
that the local people do not eat. The proliferation of small chicken Manage the Upside and Downside      163
farms in the region has led to a problem with chicken feathers, which 
the less responsible farmers simply discard after the bird has been 
plucked, leaving unsightly accumulations of feathers around the 
villages. Still, with the right type of combustion, it is possible to burn 
the feathers without generating noxious fumes. There is a project 
under way to investigate how to burn feathers, thus recovering 
energy and at the same time solving the problem of accumulating 
feathers.
Negative second-order effect:  Some farmers use chicken compost 
to fertilize their nearby vegetable patches. The proximity of the 
vegetables patches to the chicken rearing area represents a biosecurity 
hazard to the new batches of chicks and increases the presence of 
flies. This compost can be removed from the site by selling it to 
vegetable farmers who do not raise poultry, or by disposing of it in 
pits and sprinkling it with lime.
AidsAid 
Positive second-order effect:  Large-scale success would extend the 
lifespan and vitality of HIV/AIDS patients, whose period of labor 
output could be lengthened with resulting economic benefit for the 
economy in a country whose population is being hollowed out by 
AIDS-related illnesses.
Potential negative second-order effect:  There was a danger that wide-
scale increases in vitality would lead HIV/AIDS to be ingenuously 
viewed as “manageable” and therefore not feared as much as a 
“terminal” disease, causing a reduction in preventive practices.
Khaya Cookie Company
Positive second-order effect:  Y ounger employees have moved on to 
attend trade schools and even college, and/or have found employ-
ment, due to increased employability, in other businesses.164     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
Potential negative second-order effect:  As the employed women earned 
income and saved money, they ran the risk of becoming targets of 
theft and “sources of borrowing” from husbands, family members, 
and people in their community. This concern echoes recent examples 
of such negative second-order effects in the microfinance industry 
of India, where family members have pressured eligible women to 
increase borrowing to unsustainable levels of debt.
  What should you do about negative second-order effects? The 
problem is that they are not necessarily obvious. We suggest you 
make it a habit of brainstorming with your advisors on this, doing 
two types of exercise: 
 1.   Create a simple “impact map, ” depicting your answers to the 
questions: 
   •  If our venture is successful, what other factors will be pos-
itively or negatively affected? 
   •  If that happens, what other factors will be positively or 
negatively affected?
  Then discuss what indicators would signal that these second-
order effects were starting to kick in, and monitor those indicators. 
 2.   Revisit the Beneficiary Experience and Deliverables tables 
from chapters 4, 5, and 6 and, for each step, ask: 
   •  What might the consequences be of major success at this 
step?
   •  What would the positive and/or negative second-order 
effects be of significantly increasing activity at this step? 
  Then set up indicators and monitor them.
  An example from Zambia Feeds was the realization that 
significant growth in the rearing of chickens in the region might 
begin to strain the supply of baby chicks, particularly at times of 
the year when demand for poultry increased, such as at Christmas. Manage the Upside and Downside      165
Ilona worked with chick suppliers to put in place a system of 
booking orders for chicks ahead of peak demand periods. Although 
not 100% successful, the system, and Ilona’s pre-booked orders, 
persuaded chick suppliers to expand their capacity by investing in 
new production facilities ahead of current demand. 
Redirect Y our Project, or Launch a Different 
Enterprise Entirely 
While we are passionate about creating a profit-generating entity 
that attacks a social problem, we are not obsessed with doing so. This 
brings us to a very important point for organizations or individuals 
who are not looking for an entrepreneurship  approach to a social 
problem. We believe that:
 •  Even if you are not intent on a profitable solution, starting off by 
trying to find a profitable way of attacking a problem forces  people 
to be very parsimonious with resources in their operations.
 •  If you cannot find a way to be profitable, just thinking about how 
to establish your venture profitably will almost always lead to 
more efficient funding allocations at its launch. 
  If you can’t make a profit, there are decreasingly sustainable 
but nonetheless plausible alternative approaches, which we call 
redirection down an aspirations cascade . Let’s look at these as pos-
sible alternatives to giving up entirely.
Migrating Down the Aspirations Cascade
If, during the course of your controlled launch, you learn that your 
project will not be profitable, you don’t necessarily have to walk away. 
There may be an opportunity to reduce your profit aspiration levels 
and still continue to impact beneficiaries positively.
  With an aspirations cascade, we consider social impact per 
dollar (or relevant currency) consumed over time and then broadly 166     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
categorize ventures based on the degree to which they require 
funding for operations and asset replacement. (For a discussion of 
operating costs and asset replacement, see chapter 9.) 
  It may be necessary to migrate your enterprise down the 
aspirations cascade. The five enterprises that make up the aspirations 
cascade, from top to bottom, are market-scalers, self-sustainers, 
break-even operators, partial leveragers, and reliants.
Market-scaler. At the top (and most desired level) of our aspirations 
cascade we have the enterprise that we hope will meet our avowed 
aspiration: to generate sustainable and growing profits, subject 
primarily  to the delivery of an attractive minimum social impact. 
A market-scaler is a successful social enterprise that has the ability 
to significantly scale up growth on both the social benefit and profit 
dimensions, and in so doing, to attract resources for growth from 
the market at large. This enterprise generates the highest level of 
social impact per dollar expended over time. A distinctive feature 
of this type of enterprise, relative to those that come below it on 
the aspirations cascade, is its ability to raise capital from private-
sector institutions such as banks and for-profit corporations, which 
typically do not invest in nonprofits. (Conversely, many nonprofit 
funding organizations are unable or unwilling to fund for-profit 
activities.) Once a venture is self-sustaining, it no longer draws from 
the lean resources available for the social sector. If, in fact, a profitable 
venture is created, not only do the immediate beneficiaries receive 
benefits, but the venture begins to pay taxes, further contributing to 
society. In the case of Zambia Feeds, as part of its corporate social 
responsibility program, the parent company began supporting 
several nonprofit programs such as jails and church groups, whose 
prisoners and impoverished parishioners, respectively, became 
involved in farming chickens for consumption.
Self-sustainer.  If the social enterprise cannot deliver growth-  
generating profits, the project can be migrated down one level on Manage the Upside and Downside      167
the aspirations cascade to become a fully self-sustaining nonprofit 
that generates enough net revenues to cover all operating costs and 
replace depreciated (used-up) assets. This is an appealing proposition 
to the types of  donors and philanthropists who are attracted by 
the opportunity to seed/establish an organization that attends to a 
worthy cause and is thereafter able to continue to do so without the 
need for repeat funding.
Break-even operator.  If full self-sufficiency is not possible or 
appropriate, the project migrates down a level to a nonprofit that 
covers all its operating costs but needs periodic funding infusions to 
pay for assets and asset replacement.
Partial leverager.  This venture, which includes NGOs/nonprofits, 
requires periodic funding but generates some net revenue from its 
operations.
Reliant.  Once all alternatives are exhausted, you might migrate 
your project down the cascade into a pure-play charity. Charities 
are not second-class citizens! There are many noble and deserving 
charities attending to desperate needs. Using the tools in this book, 
they may be able to do even more good with their limited resources. 
The discipline of forcing even nonprofits and charities to think hard 
about making a profit or generating revenues reduces the cost of 
whatever format is finally selected. 
  Figure 13.1 illustrates the cascade from the highest level of social 
impact per dollar outcome (market-scaler) through organizations 
(charities) that are fully reliant on donations.Self-sustainer
Self-funding nonprofit168     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
Figure 13.1: Aspirations Cascade: Moderating Income AmbitionsSocial Impact/US$
TimeMarket-scaler
For-profit social enterprise
Break-even operator
Asset-subsized nonprofit
Partial leverager
Partially funded nonprofit
Reliant
Nonprofit or charity
Self-sustainer
Self-funding nonprofitFigure 13.2: Aspirations Cascade: Amplifying Social ImpactSocial Impact/US$
TimeMarket-scaler
For-profit social enterprise
Break-even operator
Asset-subsized nonprofit
Partial leverager
Partially funded nonprofit
Reliant
Nonprofit or charityManage the Upside and Downside      169
  If you are unable to meet one of or both your objectives (i.e., 
profit and social impact), you may begin to consider changing 
your enterprise’s current format. This can be done by migrating 
down the aspirations cascade (perhaps moving down the cascade 
more than one level). In essence, you disengage from your original 
organizational format and reengage within the same environment 
but using another organizational format. For example, in the AidsAid 
case, it became clear, after multiple redirections and the impacts of 
the 2008 financial crisis, that the entrepreneurial team was unable 
to create a new and sustainable revenue model. But because a large 
number of patients were benefitting from the program, the team 
elected to transfer the operation and patient data to a fully funded 
nonprofit entity. Thus, AidsAid moved from being a social enterprise 
with market-scaler aspirations on the aspirations cascade to a partial 
leverager. Once all data had been transferred to the nonprofit, the 
project was handed over with minimal inconvenience to any of the 
beneficiaries or to the clinic.
  If your organization happens to be at the lower levels of the 
Aspirations Cascade, you may want to seek ways to generate revenues 
and thereby increase your social impact, as show in Figure 13.2. 
Managers can therefore be encouraged to consider how to move to 
the next level up the cascade. This frees up resources and funding to 
introduce new beneficiaries into their program.
  In addition, a charity could focus on enhancing the lives of some of 
the beneficiaries enough so that a percentage of them would become 
self-sufficient. These beneficiaries would thus be able to migrate 
upstream. If nonprofits and charities make it a practice to build self-
sufficiency for some of their beneficiaries, those beneficiaries can 
gradually go from being recipients of charity to being self-sufficient, 
thereby making space in the charity for new beneficiaries.
  This is not a pipe dream, and it is exactly what one of our current 
projects is exploring. Communities in Malawi are looking to use 
the profits from a volunteer community farming enterprise to pay 170     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
for the schooling of AIDS orphans, who can use the education they 
get to seek employment. The project’s founders expect that some of 
the educated orphans will one day be able to manage the farming 
activity and expand it to new villages.
  Note that earlier we suggested you clearly define failure—
remember that if you reach your definition, it is time to disengage. 
Should you reach the point where you are unable to meet your social 
impact and profit objectives, and if you are unable to migrate down 
the aspirations cascade, it is time to implement your preplanned 
disengagement. 
  We have observed a number of social entrepreneurs reach this 
point, and for those who did not clearly define failure a priori , 
it was a traumatic and debilitating experience. Given the deep 
empathy inherent in social entrepreneurs, it is sometimes more 
difficult, and takes longer, for them to disengage from a project—
and therefore failure of such projects end up being more expensive. 
Social enterprises must guard vigilantly against escalation of com-
mitment. Once commitment escalates, it becomes all the more 
difficult for social enterprises to cut their losses and disengage from 
the situation. Social considerations and guilt associated with leaving 
beneficiaries without a suitable alternative can further impede 
disengagement. Self-discipline is therefore critical to effectively 
managing the process and your stakeholders.
  If you are doing what we recommended in this chapter, you can 
forge ahead. Good luck to you and good fortune to your beneficiaries!
Chapter Checklist 
After working through the processes outlined in this chapter, you 
will be doing or will have done the following:
 m  Put together a definition of failure and a disengagement plan.
 m   Celebrated early, even if modest, successes and recognized 
those on your team responsible for them.Manage the Upside and Downside      171
 m   Spent time with your advisory group working through your 
revised Beneficiary Experience and Deliverables tables to 
identify and put in place any warning signals of both negative 
and positive second-order effects.
 m   Recognized that aspirations cascades represent options for 
changes in mission or strategy from one enterprise type to 
another, and (for projects under profit duress) looked at 
alternative organizational formats in the cascade. 
Tough Love Test
If you answer no to any of the following questions, you might want to 
reconsider your venture strategy before moving ahead. If you answer 
no three times or more, you should seriously consider whether it is 
time to disengage. If you answer yes to all the following questions, by 
all means, begin to gear up for scale-up.
 1.   Have you put together a definition of failure that your advisors 
approve of? Have you preplanned disengagement?
 2.   Are you confident that your enterprise is sociopolitically safe 
and suitably insulated from interference?
 3.   Have you brainstormed possible second-order effects from 
the success of your enterprise, and put in place a set of early-
warning signals for these effects?
 4.   If you do not appear to have a market-scaler venture, have you 
considered which enterprise lower down on the aspirations 
cascade yours might be, and at what point you might migrate 
there?Scale Up Your Social Enterprise
173CHAPTER 14
Once you have your pilot behind you, and you have established 
a sound start-up operation, the next big step is to decide if you 
want to extend the scope of your social impact. If you decide to grow 
your social enterprise, the key strategic decision is how you intend to 
scale it up. Y ou have two different modalities to choose from:
 •  Cookie-cutter.  This strategy involves replicating existing oper-
ations in other geographic locations.
 •  Expansion from the core.  This strategy involves expanding 
operations at a single site in order to support the growing 
demand for the enterprise’s product or services.
  As you consider your business model, your beneficiaries, and 
available resources, determine the most appropriate method of 
scaling up. In some instances, you may decide to use a sequential 
combination of both strategies, but you should generally select just 
one to start. Each of the scale-up strategies has nuances to which 
you must attend. For example, a cookie-cutter strategy will usually 
require a higher number of middle managers, due to the dispersed 
nature of activities. It will also mean not being able to capture 
economies of scale. Furthermore, you will need to deal with the 
logistical challenge of operating manifold supply chains to and from 
each location.
  An expansion from the core at a single site may represent simpler 
management and logistics challenges due to the concentration of 
operations in one location. However, in the event of a system failure, 
the core is exposed to massive downside—versus the cookie-cutter 174     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
strategy, which allows you to keep going with the other “cookies” if 
one cookie fails.
  As you begin to think about how to scale up, use your newly 
developed skills to create a DDP for whatever modality, or modality 
combination, you choose. Though the uncertainty will have been 
reduced, it is still better to use a DDP and to identify, once again, 
your key assumptions and your vulnerability if those assumptions 
end up being wrong.
  No matter which mode of scale-up you select, there will be 
challenges. When you start your social enterprise, you typically deal 
with a few intractable problems in your initial transactions. However, 
as you begin to scale up, the nature and number of problems shift—
from a few critical challenges to more and more problems caused by 
the scale-up itself and the increased activities of a larger operation. 
The problems typically become smaller in scope and more tractable, 
but they also become more and more frequent and pressing. So the 
real danger is that, if you’re not careful, you end up being distracted 
by problem overload, which results in a loss of focus on the most 
important drivers of success.
  In this chapter, we lay out the five key challenges you are likely to 
face, regardless of which mode of scale-up you choose:
 • Hazards of visibility
 • Strains on your ecosystem
 • Internal resource pressures
 • Management challenges
 • Anticipating bigness
  Given your choice of scale-up strategy, think carefully about how 
to deal with each of these generic scale-up challenges.
  Table 14.1 provides an overview of the shift in problem structure 
as you move from start-up to scale-up. Note the left-hand column, 
“From, ” in which there are relatively few, seemingly intractable Scaling Up Your Social Enterprise      175
problems; and the right-hand column, “To, ” in which there are many, 
smaller but more frequent, and more pressing, problems.
Table 14.1: Scale-Up Challenges
From few, seemingly intractable problems  To m any, smaller, pressing problems
1. Hazards of visibility
a) No or little competition Increasingly aggressive competition
b) Minor attention from authorities Increasing interventions by authorities
c) Tolerance from vested interests Significant attention and perhaps obstruction  
  from vested interests
d) Grateful labor force Emergence of “organized” labor force
2. Strains on your ecosystem
a) Supply creation—finding reliable sources  Suppliers’ system overloading—reductions in
 of quality supply reliability and quality, increased supplier pricing  
  demands
 
b) Convincing distributors to sign up Distributors rationing limited supplies to 
  “favorites”; gouging prices
c) Beneficiaries content to wait (when they can) Escalating beneficiary demands/expectations
d) Employees grateful for work opportunity Trained employees moving to alternative 
  opportunities you have “up-skilled” them 
  to pursue
3. Internal resource pressures
a) Marketing trying to generate few, early sales Marketing identifying and serving growing  
  numbers of segments
b) Production trying to deliver adequate  Production maintaining reliability of output,
 low-volume quality quality, and equipment upkeep under capacity  
  overload 
c) Finance seeking limited start-up funds Finance scrambling to fund growing liquid  
  assets and then capacity expansion 
d) Your personally securing small qualified Human resources recruiting, training, and  
 workforce  motivating growing workforce
Note: Table 14.1 continues on following page.176     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
Table 14.1: Scale-Up Challenges (Continued)
From few, seemingly intractable problems  To m any, smaller, pressing problems
4. Management challenges
a) Management by direct supervision  Recruitment of uncompromisingly qualified  
  middle managers. Induction via task force teams  
  to assimilate newcomers
b) Management of small, “connected” workforce Management directed through supervisors  
  (with feelings of abandonment by early 
  employees)
c) Management values conveyed “one on one”  Management values conveyed through 
  orientation programs and demonstration  
  of values
d) Managing everything yourself  Decisions to be made on tasks to be delegated,  
  to whom, and when
5. Anticipating bigness
a) No need for functional experts Need to build professional finance/accounting  
  and human resources departments
b) Recruiting and training as needed Recruiting and training ahead of needs
c) Raising funds as needed Planning ahead for major project and enterprise  
  financing
  We shall discuss each problem and showcase examples to 
illustrate them. Forgive us for drawing liberally from our experience 
with Zambia Feeds, since it has been the longest-running and 
most successful of the social enterprises created in the Social 
Entrepreneurship Program. It has scaled up to a significant 
enterprise—with all the attendant scale-up problems.
Hazards of Visibility
The price of success is visibility, an often-overlooked aspect of 
becoming a larger organization. Visibility can frequently be positive, 
as it garners support for the social enterprise, but it can also raise 
challenges for you and your team in the form of competitive response, Scaling Up Your Social Enterprise      177
unexpected behavior by authorities, changes in the behavior of vested 
interest groups, and worker disruption through organizing efforts. 
Let’s review each in a little more detail.
Shift from No or Little Competition to Increasingly  
Aggressive Competition
First and foremost, success attracts competition. Initially you pose 
little threat to anybody. But as you start to grow, you attract the 
attention of any existing competitors who initially didn’t care too 
much about you. Alternatively, your success is likely to precipitate 
new competition. Perversely, in the social enterprise world, pre-
cipitating competition can actually be a positive outcome for the 
beneficiaries: more people get helped as the scale of competition 
increases. This, of course, does not absolve you from the need to 
generate enough profits and profitability for your own social impact 
to have sustained growth.
Zambia Feeds.  Once the young Zambia Feeds business was gener-
ating meaningful feed sales, Ilona received information that her 
rapid growth had attracted the attention of the larger, established 
competitors in the major urban parts of Zambia. The “word on the 
street” was that the competition was considering a significant across-
the-board price cut in an attempt to force Zambia Feeds out of 
business. In June of 2003, Ilona aggressively engaged with partners 
and consultants to identify cost-reduction possibilities with which 
to improve Zambia Feeds’ ability to compete during a protracted 
price war, should one develop. Her efforts were successful, and she 
managed to deploy linear programming and operations scheduling 
to sufficiently reduce her production costs and selling prices while 
maintaining high quality. Her venture continued to operate—in fact, 
to thrive—with a much lower cost structure.178     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
Shift from Minor Attention from Authorities to  
Increasing Interventions by Authorities
While you are small, you may not attract much attention from 
ranking members of the community or government. However, once 
your enterprise begins to look attractive or begins to disrupt existing 
social structures or payment streams, you are likely to experience 
significant changes in attitude toward your activities. This can raise 
two problems among local authorities: First, they notice you and 
can begin to invoke or generate regulations that increase your costs. 
Second, in some situations, they will now see this as an opportunity 
to extract income or revenues from you by withholding permits 
unless you do something to “help” them.
Fish farming operation.  “No, it must be mobile, ” said the prospective 
entrepreneur, looking away. We were standing in a field with a would-
be fish farmer in Africa a few years ago, and he was refusing an offer 
to pilot a small fish farming operation. We had been asked by a local 
entrepreneur, our host, to help design a fish production system that 
would produce relatively low-cost protein and create many small-
scale production opportunities for interested entrepreneurs in the 
area. Somewhat perplexed, our host asked why a less efficient mobile 
option, rather than the system we were proposing—a much more 
reliable production system already designed to be built as concrete 
ponds embedded in the ground—was a must-have. The prospective 
entrepreneur looked at us and said, “If I do all the work to start the 
farm, and I succeed, then the chief decides that he wants the fish farm 
now that it is up and running, and he will simply take it over. If it is 
a mobile system, I can dismantle the plant and put it up elsewhere. ” 
And with that, the entire project needed to be reconfigured. 
  
  A critical lesson we learned is that you need to approach and 
reach an agreement with influential stakeholders before  you com-
mence scale-up. The terms of the agreement should be clearly spelled Scaling Up Your Social Enterprise      179
out and agreed upon by the most senior members of the local 
authorities. Where possible, national-level agreements might need 
to be put in place, so as to provide some measure of defense against 
unanticipated interference at the local level.
Shift from Tolerance from Vested Interests to Significant  
Attention and Perhaps Obstruction from Vested Interests
As we have said, often parties have vested interests in the perpetuation 
of the problem, or continuation of the status quo. In the beginning, 
they may leave you alone and simply regard you as a minor (and 
more than likely, temporary) nuisance. But as you begin to have 
greater impact on the system to which they are accustomed, they 
may actively obstruct you or set in motion processes to make your 
life more difficult.
Khaya Cookie Company. As Polak’s cookie business started to grow, 
the community leaders became aware of the increasing commercial 
activity around the formerly unused facility she had leased from 
them, and they saw the opportunity to extract more rent for the 
facility. They asked for considerably more money (which, in effect, 
would have caused the enterprise’s insolvency), threatening to 
withdraw permission for baking operations if it were not paid.
Shift from a Grateful Labor Force to the Emergence  
of Organized Labor 
In the beginning, your labor force may be happy just to have a job, 
but as you start to grow, you need to anticipate that the workforce 
may not remain perfectly happy. Indeed, some workers may begin 
to organize, perhaps informally, and make demands on you because 
they feel that since you are doing well, they should do better than they 
are. What might happen is that, for the first time, you will be observed 
and targeted by formal labor organizations that see an opportunity 180     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
to expand their membership base by securing your labor force. 
Unionization of your workforce, or even informal organization of 
your workers, with its attendant increases in costs and organizational 
complexity, is something you may need to anticipate and prepare to 
manage as efficiently and effectively as possible.
Zambia Feeds.  Organized labor unions spent a number of years 
mobilizing a core group of Zambia Feeds employees, who ultimately 
succeeded in motivating sufficient numbers of their coworkers to 
join the union, thereafter obliging management to recognize and 
negotiate with the union as legitimate representation of the workers’ 
interests. 
Strains on Y our Ecosystem 
Shift from Supplier Creation to Suppliers’ System Overloading
At the onset of your social enterprise, you may find it necessary to 
create a supply chain for yourself (perhaps such suppliers did not 
exist before) by convincing people and businesses who can make 
what you need, of the quality you need, when you need it. This may 
require that you bring in resources from outside the geographic area 
in which your venture is located. 
  As your venture expands, and your demands on your various 
suppliers grow, you might begin to exceed the capacity of the supply 
system in place. This is likely to have negative effects on both your 
enterprise and your beneficiaries. For example, an overloaded 
supplier may begin to deliver subpar-quality supplies or services. 
Furthermore, there may come a point where suppliers recognize 
they have supplier power and begin to raise their prices, all of which 
impacts your reputation, profits, and profitability. 
  Be on the lookout for emerging evidence of supplier overload and 
supplier power behavior. Give thought to managing your suppliers 
in accordance with your own demands—training and assisting Scaling Up Your Social Enterprise      181
them if necessary—so that they continue to support you and your 
objectives.
Zambia Feeds.  In the early days of rapid growth, Zambia Feeds’ 
customers were unable to secure sufficient supplies of chicks during 
peak demand periods preceding national holidays. As a consequence, 
Zambia Feeds’ own sales were adversely affected, and inventory 
levels rose rapidly. The following season and thereafter, Zambia 
Feeds worked with chick suppliers to forecast seasonal demands 
more accurately and to prepare suppliers for the sometimes large 
fluctuations in orders.
Shift from Convincing Distributors to Sign Up to Distributors 
Rationing Limited Supplies and Gouging Prices
As a de novo  start-up, with no track record and little credibility, you 
may have to go out and beg people to distribute for you. In the case 
of Zambia Feeds, distributors had to be convinced and, in some 
cases, created—by persuading local trading stores to stock feed 
on consignment. As you begin to grow, and the demand for your 
product grows, you might begin to run out of capacity to supply 
sufficient quantities to meet your distributors’ orders. In this case, 
there is a danger that distributors will respond to your inability to 
meet their demands by repricing their limited deliveries as they 
see fit, and rationing—that is, choosing which beneficiaries are 
served and which are not, and at what prices. A sure way to create 
irate customers is to have a distributor serve the needs of one large 
customer at the expense of many smaller ones. Y ou need to plan who 
will do the rationing: Do you decide which customers will get your 
limited supplies, or do you allow distributors to supply their favorites 
or gouge customers with higher prices?
Zambia Feeds. Production breakdowns periodically affected 
delivery to distributors. During such times, Ilona was fast to respond 182     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
and engage with her distributors. She and her sales team negotiated 
which customers received supplies and when. Available supplies 
were allocated fairly across Zambia Feeds’ portfolio of customers. In 
this way, customers were warned of impending shortfalls in supply 
so they could adjust their chick purchasing and raising schedules, 
and not find themselves with a coop full of starving birds.
Shift from Beneficiaries Content to Wait to Beneficiaries with 
Escalating Demands and Expectations 
In the early days of your enterprise, it will not be unusual for your 
beneficiaries to be happy just to have your product or service. Y ou 
must ensure that you are able to deliver what your beneficiaries have 
ordered and maintain quality while doing so. For example, do you 
have sufficient and reliable transportation? Are you able to finance 
sufficient finished goods and raw materials inventories?
  As demand starts to grow, beneficiaries become used to 
experiencing your offering and its benefits and will become annoyed 
and angry should there be an interruption in timely service. Their 
level of patience will gradually decline as their expectations for your 
products or services rise. One of your primary objectives is to assist 
beneficiaries in attaining a higher standard of living. In many cases, 
this will involve helping them develop an income stream upon which 
they will become dependent. Y ou should expect that any threat to 
that income stream will be met with a high degree of frustration and 
may provoke angry reaction. 
  It is often cheaper to buy by forward contract and be secure in 
the knowledge that you will be able to deliver to your beneficiary 
expectations rather than fall short and risk losing these customers 
to emergent competitors. However, this capability requires access to 
capital at an acceptable cost in order to finance the inventory.
Zambia Feeds. Zambia Feeds must commit to a certain tonnage of 
soybeans before the crop is harvested so as to ensure it h as sufficient Scaling Up Your Social Enterprise      183
soybean cake inventory for production. Soybeans are harvested once 
a year and are often in short supply and priced high between seasons. 
Shift from Employees Grateful for Work to Trained Employees 
Moving to Alternative Opportunities
Initially your employees might be perfectly happy just to have a 
job, as it is an opportunity to generate income for them and their 
families. Y our training them to do the job is an investment for you. 
To their advantage (and to your credit), they become increasingly 
employable, not just within your enterprise but also elsewhere, 
using the very skills you helped them develop. This is good from a 
social perspective, as the more people out there with needed skills, 
the better for the economy and society. However, you will then have 
the added burden of replacing such workers after having invested in 
their training. In some cases, emergent competitors will recognize 
the quality of your training-and-development program and actively 
target your employees as prospective candidates for their own firms, 
thereby making you a source of skills development and labor supply, 
and increasing your operations costs.
AidsAid. The AidsAid project frequently suffered the loss of key 
programming talent. This is a particularly poignant example of the 
ability of skilled workers in near-Knightian environments to move 
frequently for higher pay elsewhere. Not only did management 
have to attend to the disruption caused by the immediate loss of 
programmers who resigned, but it also had to lay out significantly 
higher programming costs than budgeted, to pay for the emergency 
services of skilled programmers flown in from elsewhere on 
temporary work permits.
Internal Resource Pressures
As your enterprise starts to grow, so will internal pressures. In gen-
eral, when scaling up, you move from a position in which one 184     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
manager runs everything to a position where one manager is no 
longer sufficient. As a result, you will need to build several types of 
functional capability, function by function.
Shift from Marketing Trying to Generate a Few Early Sales  
to Marketing Identifying and Serving a Growing Number  
of Segments
Initially you are concerned with getting the first few sales in the 
book and delivered. But as you start to scale up, the primary job 
of marketing becomes identifying, targeting, and servicing the most 
important segments of beneficiaries. Segmentation begins to take on 
a much more important role as you decide which of the growing 
segments your operation can best serve, bearing in its mind that your 
mission is to balance helping targeted beneficiaries with generating 
financial results sufficient to sustain your enterprise. Y ou are forced 
to move from self-marketing to a more formal organizational 
marketing process. It is therefore incumbent upon you to give 
sufficient thought to how your marketing capability is going to be 
developed and delivered ahead of need.
Zambia Feeds. Zambia Feeds developed a sales force and marketing 
team over time, both of which worked together to build customer 
management systems based on marketing analytics such as 
geographic location, frequency of purchase, size of purchase, and 
local influence of beneficiaries. When Zambia Feeds started, it had no 
competitors in its region within its chosen customer segments. Once 
the enterprise had grown in stature and expanded geographically, its 
current and prospective customers expected it to operate wherever 
its competitors were operational. For example, customers, industry 
authorities, and even competitors expected Zambia Feeds to 
participate in the annual national and regional agricultural shows. 
While Zambia Feeds could use these shows to highlight its products Scaling Up Your Social Enterprise      185
and services, this meant that core marketing and sales personnel had 
to attend each show, and were therefore not with their customers in 
their respective sales regions during the events.
Shift from Production Delivering Adequate Low-Volume Quality 
to Production Maintaining Reliability of Output, Equipment 
Upkeep, and Quality under Capacity Overload
Y ou started by attempting to deliver adequate amounts of product 
at relatively low volumes (you were just getting started), at adequate 
levels of quality. As you begin to grow, the challenge becomes how to 
sustain reliable output. With increasing volumes, you need to sustain 
scheduling and quality management under increasing production 
pressures. Y ou will also need to ensure that your equipment is suitably 
maintained, and that you have enough capacity. This becomes 
particularly difficult when following a cookie-cutter strategy, 
because you have to manage these issues in many places, and you 
can physically be in only one place at a time. It is therefore essential 
to begin thinking how to create sufficient management capacity to 
execute your intended strategy. This means that before you scale up, 
you may have to train management ahead of needing them.
Zambia Feeds.  As Zambia Feeds began to experience increasing 
demands on its production capacity, under pressure to produce 
ever-increasing targets, employees occasionally mixed large batches 
of feed inconsistently and therefore delivered lower-quality product 
to the market. It is mission-critical that animal feed consistency 
be maintained in order for beneficiaries to raise poultry reliably. 
Incorrectly formulated feed has the potential to kill young chicks, 
thereby immediately compromising the farmer. Ilona was forced to 
begin automating production with industrial-grade mixers, in order 
to maintain reliability at higher levels of production. These expenses 
will be further addressed under financing issues.186     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
Shift from Finance Seeking Limited Start-Up Funds to Finance 
Scrambling to Fund Growing Liquid Assets and Capacity 
Expansion
Whe n you started out, you sought out a limited number of start-up 
funds. Now, as you grow, particularly under rapid scale-up, you see 
a dramatic increase in the need for liquid assets (i.e., inventory and 
receivables), which puts the enterprise under cash flow pressure. What 
you need now are people who understand cash flow management 
and the basic principles of financing a growing operation.
AidsAid.  A lower-level bookkeeper was unaware of a change in 
the national tax code. This change in tax assessment represented a 
massive potential future tax obligation, which was both unanticipated 
and unknown prior to a formal inquiry by the tax department. This 
expense was large enough to threaten the solvency of the clinic, and 
the clinic owner spent a significant amount of time trying to raise 
funds to meet the obligation and hire tax advisors to negotiate on her 
behalf. Had there been in place a suitably qualified accountant, the 
entire episode may have been prevented.
Shift from Y our Personally Securing a Small, Qualified Workforce 
to Human Resources Recruiting, Training, and Motivating a 
Growing Workforce
At the launch of your enterprise you may have identified and recruited 
a small labor force; perhaps you even had to train a number of them. 
As you start to scale up, however, your need for people will grow, 
which means you will need more sophisticated ways of recruiting, 
training, and motivating this growing workforce. Perhaps the most 
important role you have in managing scale-up is to recruit and 
train the very best workers available, and letting go those who don’t 
work out—both of which require discipline and steadfastness. It is 
your responsibility to determine the performance standards of each Scaling Up Your Social Enterprise      187
employee function and to ensure that none be allowed to jeopardize 
the expectations and standards you set. The last thing you want is 
to employ inadequately skilled staff and subsequently witness your 
organization falter and your time become increasingly diverted from 
the organization’s mission. 
Management Challenges
Shift from Management by Direct Supervision to Recruitment  
of Uncompromisingly Qualified Middle Managers
In the beginning the management of your organization was executed 
by you, and you provided direct supervision and control over the 
activities of everyone in the firm. As your venture grows, however, 
particularly with a cookie-cutter strategy, you will need middle 
managers. In uncertain environments, middle managers are usually 
scarce, if available at all. Thus, you will need a process to select and 
train middle management and develop their ability to execute in 
your absence without needing to turn to you to solve small daily 
problems. In other words, you need to think about those functions 
you will delegate, to whom, when, and where. When discussing 
organizational scale-up, one of our favorite serial entrepreneurs likes 
to use the phrase “If you fail to develop effective middle management 
in time, you become like a spider trapped in its own web. ”
Zambia Feeds.  Ilona faced constant challenges in developing the 
skill sets of middle managers operating distribution centers. Given 
its relatively short shelf life, it is critical that feed be rotated correctly 
through the distribution facility using the first in, first out method. 
Inventory that is held longer than its useful shelf life will spoil and 
must then be thrown away.188     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
Shift from Management of Small, “Connected” Workforce to 
Management  through Supervisors 
During the start-up phase, the team is small, and everyone is con-
nected to you and to one another. With scale-up and the move to 
management through supervisors, you lose the personal touch 
with employees that you had in the beginning. Now someone else 
is directing employees’ activities within the enterprise, which can 
lead to feelings of abandonment by them: “He does not care about us 
anymore. ” “She never speaks to us. ” We have observed this multiple 
times in the field, the consequence being a gradual demotivation of 
employees who value the intimacy of a small firm. Y ou must develop 
an internal strategy to wean employees off direct interaction with 
you and onto your emerging middle management team.
Shift from Management Values Conveyed “One on One” to 
Management Values Conveyed through Orientation Programs 
and Demonstration of Values
Y ou initially brought a set of values to your enterprise that were 
conveyed one on one by the decisions you made and the discussions 
you had with the people who reported to you. As your venture grows, 
and particularly with dispersed management, the sets of values 
somehow need to be transferred to employees in other, sometimes 
remote locations. This may have to be done through the use of 
orientation programs in which the values of the company, the basic 
rules of conduct, and the expectations for each employee are clearly 
articulated. This requires forethought with respect to the appropriate 
messages and communication channels. It also takes time. Consider 
developing a powerful induction program that both you and your 
most senior managers attend. This is not something you can delegate 
during the early stages of scale-up, because if you show that you are 
too busy to pay attention to the values you espouse, no one else will 
pay attention to them, either.Scaling Up Your Social Enterprise      189
Zambia Feeds. Ilona developed a simple but effective method of 
induction for new operations workers. New workers were taken 
on as temporary hires until they had proven themselves within the 
organization. During their induction phase, they were required to 
wear a different color overall from those of the full-time workers, who 
monitored and managed these new hires. The middle management 
team assessed each temporary worker and was involved in deciding 
whether to hire them full time.
Shift from Managing Everything Y ourself to Deciding Which  
Tasks Will Be Delegated, to Whom, and When
This self-evident need often goes unattended (despite its self-
evidence), as owners allow themselves to be trapped in their own 
webs. It is crucial that you remain aware of your personal time 
constraints during scale-up. A good way of doing so is simply to look 
at your calendar and the number of hours per day available to you 
during the start-up phase. Then continue to do so as the demands 
on your time increase with the size of your organization. While your 
obligations to organization management increase dramatically, your 
hours available per day do not. It is vital, therefore, to plan ahead, 
and decide which tasks will be delegated, to whom, and when. As 
you do so, remember that members of your management team need 
to be trained to take on their new roles without disruption to you or 
the organization.
Anticipating Bigness
Shift from No Need for Functional Experts to Need to Build 
Finance/Accounting and Human Resources Departments
In the beginning you may not need functional experts, as you are 
running the enterprise yourself. For example, you may be doing 
your own production scheduling, marketing strategies, management 190     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
accounting, and operations oversight. However, as your venture 
grows, you will need departments that perform these tasks. Y ou 
cannot spend your time keeping the books yourself. Y ou will also need 
a legitimate human resources department to think aggressively about 
recru iting, training, staffing, and promotion systems. This is mission-
critical as you develop a stable and competitive larger enterprise.
  During this process, it is paramount that you think through the 
more important areas versus the less important, as you will need to 
delegate when you are no longer able to manage everything yourself.
Zambia Feeds. As Zambia Feeds expanded, Ilona first hired a manager 
to head up the administration function. This role was expanded to 
include a small human resources department, the responsibility of 
which was to manage and develop the growing workforce and to 
serve as the primary liaison between workers, management, and a 
labor union once one was formally represented within the enterprise. 
The manager later reported to a chief financial officer, who was in 
turn responsible for all group finance and accounting.
Shift from Recruiting and Training as Needed to Recruiting and 
Training Ahead of Needs
During the enterprise launch, you recruited and trained as needed. 
With scale-up, the number of people you need to recruit expands 
dramatically, thus requiring a formal system to recruit people ahead 
of when you need them and not after you need them—usually when 
it is too late. Remember that in many high-uncertainty environments 
there is seldom a ready supply of the skills and capabilities required 
for effective management of a growing enterprise.
AidsAid.  Jaytee sent the AidsAid project manager to short courses 
in the United States to learn the basic requirements of an effective 
EMR system. Once she had been trained, she was in a position to 
develop local skills in accurate EMR creation and main-tenance. Scaling Up Your Social Enterprise      191
This training made her eminently more employable in her area (and 
at risk of going elsewhere—a problem we have already discussed).
Shift from Raising Funds as Needed to Planning Ahead for  
Major Enterprise Financing
When you launched your venture, you calculated the required 
funds for proof-of-concept and planned to learn rapidly at low 
cost, all the while allowing for redirection as you learned. Now, as 
you consider strategic scale-up requirements, you may need more 
sophisticated financial planning capabilities. In other words, you 
may need to convince banks or investors ahead of time  of the value 
and attractiveness of capital expansion plans, using well-developed 
project and enterprise assessment techniques.
  Now refer back to your Funding table (chapter 6) to review 
funding needs and potential sources of funds. In particular, consider 
capital expense needs: What assets do you require to facilitate your 
scale-up needs? Are they available on lease, at acceptable terms? If 
not, can you get them used? If not, what options are available for the 
purchase of new equipment?
  Once you have determined what assets are necessary, you can 
begin to consider the funding sources currently available. Remember, 
once you begin to purchase assets— particularly expensive assets 
upon which you pay interest for borrowed funds—you have 
effectively increased your fixed overhead costs. If you borrow funds 
from a bank, for example, you will be required to pay interest on the 
principal, as well as eventually repay the loan.
Chapter Checklist 
Following the processes in this chapter, you will have:
 m   Determined the most appropriate growth strategy for your 
social enterprise, namely a cookie-cutter strategy or an expan-
sion from the core (or a combination of the two).192     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
 m   Considered the hazards of visibility and prepared your social 
enterprise to defend against or attend to each hazard as it 
emerges.
 m   Planned to develop your supplier and distribution systems 
ahead of growth, in order to mitigate the organizational strains 
brought on by that growth.
 m   Carefully considered the implications of key employee attrition, 
developed a compensation strategy to keep those employees 
most important to you, and prepared a replacement plan for 
those who leave.
 m   Developed an explicit “middle management to development” 
plan, which includes a plan for work prioritization and 
delegation.
 m   Developed an internal strategy to wean employees off direct 
interaction with you and onto your emerging middle manage-
ment team.
 m   Planned to build administrative functional departments, such 
as finance/accounting and human resources, to provide a 
stable internal platform for enterprise scale-up.
 m   Carefully considered the financial implications of your scale-
up strategy and identified the available and appropriate sources 
of major financing.
Tough Love Test
If you answer no to any of the following questions, you have work to 
do, and you might want to reconsider your timetable or path to scale. 
If you answer no more than three times, you are not ready for scale-
up. If you answer yes to all the following questions, you are ready to 
proceed with your plan to scale up your social enterprise. Good luck!
 1.   Have you identified the key hazards to your social enterprise as 
it begins to scale up and becomes more visible? Do you have a 
plan to mitigate or preemptively deal with such challenges?Scaling Up Your Social Enterprise      193
 2.   Are you confident that your supplier base has the capacity to 
support your growth while maintaining quality and reliability 
of supply?
 3.   Are you confident that your distribution system has the 
capacity to support your growth without compromising deliv-
ery reliability and your customer base?
 4.   Have you identified appropriate middle management team 
members to whom you will delegate key administrative respon-
sibility (e.g., marketing and sales, production management, 
finance and administration, and HR recruitment and training)?
 5.   Are you convinced that the skills required to support an 
effective scale-up strategy exist and are accessible to you? If 
not, have you developed a plausible plan to develop high-
potential employees within an acceptable time frame and at an 
acceptable cost?
 6.   Have you calculated the resources required to support your 
scale-up? Are you confident in your ability to secure those 
resources?Conclusion
195If you have survived all the Tough Love Tests we’ve posed, you 
should be well on your way to operating a growing and profit-
generating enterprise that is delivering increasing social benefits to 
an increasing number of beneficiaries and is poised to scale up. That, 
of course, is the purpose of this book, and we are thrilled that you 
have come this far. 
 Y ou are to be congratulated for having survived the struggle it 
must have taken to get to this productive stage. Relatively few social 
enterprises succeed at this, and your experience and the insights you 
have picked up along the way need to be captured, documented, 
and distributed to others like you, folks who have the compassion, 
combined with the pragmatism, to go out and build something noble 
yet also sustainable.
 It would be extremely useful for us to learn about your 
experiences, and even more useful to know which parts of this book 
you found worthwhile and which did not work for you. We plan to 
update the book over time based on reader feedback.
 Please be in touch, and even more importantly, continue down 
the socially constructive path you have forged. Y ou can write to us at 
whartonschoolpress@wharton.upenn.edu.
 For updates, please visit wsp.wharton.upenn.edu/book/social-
entrepreneurs-playbook. 197Acknowledgments
This book would not have been possible but for the editorial 
and publication expertise and skills of Steve Kobrin, Shannon 
Berning, and Teresa Kocudak. Their insights, assistance, and patience 
turned this manuscript from a tedious tome into something social 
entrepreneurs out there are embracing and already aggressively using. 
The measure of their contribution lies not in the number of ebooks 
downloaded, but rather, in the number of humanitarians who have 
used the concepts in this book and thereby helped people in poverty 
and need. Without Steve, Shannon, and Teresa’s ministrations, this 
change would not have happened.
 Thanks to Whitney Peeling, whose publicity and PR skills were 
invaluable in helping us get the word out to the constituencies that 
mattered so much to us—all those folks working on reducing the 
distress of the so many people round the world.
 Thanks to Roz Cohen and the team of students she managed, 
including Ravi Bellur, Samantha Fox, Sooreen Lee, Yuchen Luo, 
Danielle Matsumoto, Beth Mlynarczk, Roberto Sanabria, David 
Segal, Farah Shah, Serena Shi, May Sripatanaskul, Nancy Trinh, Ava 
Zhang, and Darya Zmachynskaya, all of whom helped us with the 
research, the analytics, the discovery-driven plans, and the fieldwork 
needed to help create and execute our field projects.
 In particular, thanks to Christopher Wilfong for his outstanding 
contribution to the Zambia Feeds project in the development 
and implementation of the linear program and logistics planning 
tools. Also to Sarah Ryerson for her significant contribution to the 
performance of the clinic in the AidsAid project.
 We would like to thank the following people who reviewed the 
work and our documents as they evolved and provided significant 
commentary and insight that helped shape the direction and voice 
of our manuscript: Allison Berliner, Benjamin Bruckman, Daniel 198     Acknowledgments
Cauley, Jeanne Chen, Melissa Kushner, Mary McKay, Jennifer Ralston, 
Hayley Rosengarten, and CJ Wise.
 Thanks also to Diana Dickinson for her commitment and 
support “on the ground. ”
 Lynn Selhat’s assistance in editing early drafts of the manuscript 
was invaluable.
 Our deepest thanks to the Wharton alumni who have sponsored 
this program. In particular, the Ambani, Collins, Durrett, Gruber, 
Holekamp, Hurst, Meyer, Poole, Rosenstein, Snider, and Trone 
families for their interest, commitment, and willingness to support 
work in a space fraught with uncertainty.199Mustapha Abokede
Isaac Aggrey 
Nafis (Peter) Ahmed
Leena Al Olaimy 
Faten Alqaseer 
Holger W . Altvater
Jill Anick 
Pankaj Aswal 
Lisa Atiq, social entrepreneur
Anisha Atluri
Ivan Atuyambe 
Elvis Austins, founder,
 SpellAfrica Initiative
Dr. Paolo Aversa, Cass 
 Business School,   
 City University, London
Elena Avramov
Daniel Kwadwo Bampoh
Matias R. Barletta
Oscar Castañón Barragán
Emily Behr 
Aman Bhullar 
Daniella Bien-Aime, 
  adult educator, Facilitator, and 
Trainer
Juan Carlos Díaz Bilbao
Harlan S. BlynnGiada Bono
Cory Bowman, Netter 
  Center for Community 
Partnerships, University  
of Pennsylvania
Vicki R. Brackens, founder,  
 World of Cheddar, LLC
Theresa Bradley
Karla Breceda
Miguel Bremer-Wirtig 
Katherine Brown-Hoekstra
C. J. Brown
Greg Byrne, principal, 
 The Three Little Pigs Co.
Andrés Gutiérrez Campos
Marc Carr
Meaghan M. Casey
Richard J. Catherall
Charles D. Chand
Lloyd Chang
Paulo Chikoti-Bandua 
Myrto Chliova 
Roy Coheb 
David Conegliano 
Harris Contos, DMD, MBA
Renee Crichlow MD, FAAFP
Nurfarini Daing We would also like to thank the following advisors who helped 
shape this book by taking a survey about the free book, The Social 
Entrepreneur’s Playbook: Pressure Test Your Start-Up Idea—Step 1.The Social Entrepreneur’s 
Playbook Advisory Group200     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook Advisory Group  
Manvir Dandona 
Chirag Dave
Nestor Lopez de Arroyabe 
 Detrick DeBurr 
Guadalupe de la Mata 
Rahul Dewanjee, founder,   
 Xeronow.com
Derek DiGiacomo
Thomas Dokubo 
Lindsey Dunn, Skills to Shine
Aron Dutta, global head,   
 Capital Markets Strategy, 
 Cisco Systems; board   
 member, Verificient.com
Philipp Alexander Ebel
Eugene Eccli 
Desmond D. Emanuel
Robert T. Esposito, Esq. 
Mr. Varuna Eswer 
David A. Eustice
Orion Falvey, cofounder,   
 InVision Foundation
Abayomi Fawehinmi 
Horace L. Flournoy 
John Fox 
Samantha Fox 
Dennis Foy 
Michael Francis 
Elena Gaffurini 
Julio César Reynaga Galeas
Andrés Garcia de Tuñon
Jorge Valdés Garciatorres, PMP
Forough Ghahremani
Elena Gilson 
Myra Goldstein Brown 
Chad Gomes
Jerome S. Gotangco
Ken Granderson Nico Groenenberg 
Gro Martin Gunnarsen
Anthony N. Haddad
Y . Julie Han
Ayaz Haniffa 
Thomas Hardy 
Ira Harkavy
Lawrence Heimowitz, CPA
R. Paul Herman, Wharton ’89, 
 CEO of HIP Investor, Inc.
Jonathan Ho
Edmundo Hoffens 
Mark Horoszowski, cofounder, 
 MovingWorlds
Darnley W . Howard 
Lucia Huang 
Ariel Huskins, Founder, 
 25:40life.com
Cynthia Jaggi 
Dhruvi Kanabar
Deepa Kapoor 
Mutembei Kariuki 
Emanuel R. Kastl
Rasin A. Immad Katta
John Y ohan Kim
Sasibai Kimis
Julie King, principal, 
 Galileo Agency
Vera Klauer
Keith Kohler
Dr. Jussi V . Koivisto
Pragna Kolli 
Monika Konieczny
 Korbinian
Jon Korin, Wharton ’76
Vikrant Kothari 
Marcin Krasnowolski
Dr. Stavros D. Ktenas The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook Advisory Group      201
Aruna Kulatunga 
Gloria Lam 
Rachel Laurie
James Law, Singapore
Natt Leelawat 
Isaac Lemor
Eddie Ler
Trisonia Lewis 
Henry C. Lin
Ernestine Liu 
Kana Lea One Love 
Johannes Luger 
Robyn Lui
Benjamin Lütgebüter 
Megan McDonald, member  
  of the Board of Directors, 
Attention Deficit Disorder 
Resources
Cecelia McFadden
Rauf N. Mammadov
Martina Mangelsdorf
Sudhir B. Mankodi
David T. Matta
D. Bruce Merrifield 
Gopal Metro
Marta Milkowska 
Mary C. Miller, JD, 
 SPHR, ACC
Michael Miller 
Professor Richard T. Minoff
Deepam Mishra 
Vija Mitha 
Michele Modina
Eshita Mohanty 
Suzanne Lashmet Montazer
Mehmet Fahri Muftuoglu
Brian Mullen 
Abd-ul MuqtadirrDennis Nakamura, 
 Up!Grader Institute, 
 Sao Paulo, Brazil
Matthew Nelson, COO,   
 GreatSchools
Phil Neo KJ
Eduardo Barclay Nihill
José A. Nistal 
Bosun Olawore 
Nicholas Ondrejka 
Randie Espera Ongoco
Olu Oyesanmi, MD, MPH
Michael Paolini 
Jerry Parkes, CEO, Injaro   
  Agricultural Capital  
 Holdings Limited,  
 Accra, Ghana
Erica Peressini 
Larry D. Perkins, PhD, MBA
John F. Possumato
Silvia Prastani 
Tahir Qazi
Michael Radke
Vinay Varma Raja, director,  
 OrgPEOPLE
Professor Manisha   
 Rajadhyaksha 
Brandale D. Randolph, 
  executive director, Project 
Poverty, Wharton ’98
Grant Regan
José J. Riera 
Abid Rizvi 
Sergei Rodionov
Juan Carlos Roldan
Richard S. Roque
Alberto Ruíz 
Megan Metz Rye202     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook Advisory Group  
Miguel Paredes Sadler 
Samuel Safran 
Crescelito Martin S. D. Salvador
Randy Samsel 
James Schmeling, managing 
  director and cofounder, 
Institute for Veterans and 
Military Families, Syracuse 
University
David R. Schwartz
Miguel Scordamaglia
Noman Ahmed Shaheer 
Kate Sherwood,
 Execution Strategy
Marika Shioiri-Clark 
Anant Shukla 
Arvind Singh, founder, 
  Aavishkaar Micro Venture 
Capital Fund, and social 
entrepreneur, Wharton AMP
Snehanand (Ravi) Sinha, 
  chairperson, Centre for Social 
Innovation, @BIMTECH
Samaira A. Sirajee 
Moses Soh 
Jonas Solbach 
David Souder 
Christina S. O. Sprock 
Param Sreekanth 
Dr. Ravi Srinivasan
Karim Srouji
Susan D. Steiner
Sean Steinmarc
Cathy Stephenson 
Emily V . Stone
Sabarinathan Swaminathan 
Ferdinand Swart, MScUnmesh Tambwekar 
Timothy M. Taylor
Trang Quynh Than
Brett C. Thibodeau
Paritosh Tiwari
Leanne Tobias, Managing   
 Principal, Malachite LLC
Mingles Tsoi 
Emmanouel Tzouvelekas 
Omar Valdez
Gwen Vaughan 
Tatiana Vdovina
Shwetank Verma, Esq.
S. C. Vijayakumaar
Mason Vollmer, agricultural 
  director, Camphill Soltane, 
Glenmoore, PA
Vishal M. Vyas
Karen Wagner 
Faith Wallace
Kathryln Wang 
Arnold I. Weiss, DDS, MScD
Landon Wiedenman, founder, 
 Profile Health Systems
Anne Wilmerding 
C. J. Wise, chief operating 
 officer, goodsFORgood, Inc.
David Richard Wistocki
Steven Woda, uKnow.com
Carlos Alberto Wolff 
Don Woolridge 
John G. Y edinak 
Geoff Y enson 
Banruo (Rock) Zhou
James Zhou
Konstantina Zoehrer 
Mihai Zota 203Notes
1  Frank H. Knight, Risk, Uncertainty and Profit , Boston: Hart, Schaffner and Marx, 
1921. Later references to “near-Knightian” circumstances refer to those where almost 
anything can happen. In such high-uncertainty contexts, the range of values of the 
environmental variables impinging on possible outcomes is wide and, importantly, 
there is no way of assigning a probability to their value other than assuming all 
values in the range are equiprobable. In such situations, the model builder just does 
not know: so the initial management mindset must be characterized by the desire to 
reduce uncertainty to risk.
2  For confidentiality, identifying details have been changed. 
3  William Foster and Jeffrey Bradach, “Should Nonprofits Seek Profits?” Harvard 
Business Review  (Feb. 2005).
4 Ibid., p. 2.
5  Coimbatore Krishnarao Prahalad, The Fortune at the Bottom of the Pyramid , 
Philadelphia: Wharton School Publishing, 2004.
6 “Net revenues” simply means you get more revenues than the costs you incur.
7  M. H. Boisot and I. C. MacMillan, “Crossing Epistemological Boundaries: Managerial 
and Entrepreneurial Approaches to Knowledge Management, ” Long Range Planning  
37, no. 6 (2004): 505–24.
8  J. D. Thompson and I. C. MacMillan, “Business Models: Creating New Markets 
and Societal Wealth, ” Long Range Planning  43, no. 2–3 (2010): 291–307; and J. D. 
Thompson and I. C. MacMillan, “Making Social Ventures Work, ” Harvard Business 
Review  9 (2010): 66–73.
9 We thank Sue Yun Chi and Acumen for sharing their Acumen case study on Ecotact.
10  WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation, 
“Progress on Sanitation and Drinking Water: 2013 Update, ” http://www.wssinfo.org/
fileadmin/user_upload/resources/JMPreport2013.pdf. 
11  B. Steven Kerr, “On the Folly of Rewarding A, while Hoping for B, ” Academy of 
Management Executive  (Feb. 1995): 9, 1; ABI/INFORM Global, p. 7.
12  Free is a loaded word in this case, because defecating in public places is actually 
not “free. ” It costs a society a great deal in terms of mortality and morbidity due to 
illness, lost productivity, and so on. Unfortunately, many people who defecate in 
public do so, first, because they have no other choice—their governments do not 
provide the basic waste infrastructures we take for granted in the West—and second, 
because they do not readily see the connection between their actions and the spread 
of disease.204     Notes
13  This is one of the main reasons the Wharton Social Entrepreneurship Program 
prefers to work with intrapreneurial ventures.
14  See http://www.singerco.com/company/history%20?iframe=true&width=  
100%&height=100%.
15  “CEMEX: Innovation in Housing for the Poor, ” Michigan Business School Case 
Study, Dec. 12, 2003.
16  Ibid.
17  John Paul, “Patrimonio Hoy: A Groundbreaking Corporate Program to Alleviate 
Mexico’s Housing Crisis, ” NextBillion.net—Development Through Enterprise, ” 
NextBillion.net | Development through Enterprise, May 26, 2009.
18  Rita Gunther McGrath and Ian C MacMillan, MarketBusters , Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard Business School Press, 2005.
19  Our thanks to Jeanne Chen for this quote. 
20  For confidentiality, the social entrepreneur’s name and other identifying details have 
been changed.
21  Alexander Osterwalder, Yves Pigneur, Alan Smith (and 470 practitioners from 45 
countries), Business Model Generation , Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons, 2010.
22  R. G. McGrath and I. C. MacMillan, “Discovery-Driven Planning, ” Harvard Business 
Review  73, no. 4 (1995): 44–54. 
23  Return on sales (ROS): A ratio widely used to evaluate a company’s operational 
efficiency, ROS is also known as a firm’s “operating profit margin. ” Calculated by 
dividing the profits of the business by the total revenues generated. 
24  Return on assets (ROA): A performance measure used to evaluate the efficiency of 
the firm’s assets, ROA is calculated by dividing the profits from the business by the 
total assets (e.g., equipment, buildings, inventory).
25  Y ou should do your DDP based on what you expect to be happening three to five 
years after start-up, not performance at start-up. Only  if the three- to five-year targets 
seem doable, then and only then, should you go to the effort of the detailed planning 
of the launch. If they do not look doable in three to five years, drop the project.
26  Rita Gunther McGrath and Ian C. MacMillan, Discovery-Driven Growth: A 
Breakthrough Process to Reduce Risk and Seize Opportunity , Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard Business School Press, 2009.
27 Ibid.
28  Clayton Christensen, Scott Cook, and Taddy Hall, “Marketing Malpractice: The 
Cause and the Cure, ” Harvard Business Review  83, no. 12 (Dec. 2005). 
29  B. M. Staw, “Knee-Deep in the Big Muddy: A Study of Escalating Commitment to 
a Chosen Course of Action, ” Organizational Behavior and Human Performance  16 
(1978): 27–44.205A
accounting skills, 145
advisory group, 12–13
 checkpoint review process, 137–138
 competitive alternatives, evaluating,  
  42–43
 deliverables table, input regarding,  
  48
 negative second-order effects,  
 addressing, 164–165
agriculture/nutrition, 5–6
AidsAid system, 57–58, 60–61, 64–65,  
 70–73, 151, 160, 163, 169
 recruiting and training ahead of  
  needs, 190–191
 scaling up, challenges from, 
  183, 186
 alternative enterprises. 
  See competition
articulating process, 3–4
advisory board, 12–13
 checklist, 13
 Ikotoilet (East Africa) example, 6–8
 plausibility criteria, 8–12
 tough love test, 14
 Zambia Feeds example, 5–6
aspirations cascade, 165–170
asset funding, 115–118
assumptions
 after-action reviews, 154
 checklist for examining, 138–39
 checklist template, 125
 checkpoint review process, 137–138
 checkpoints to test most sensitive  
 assumptions, 132–138, 153–154
 Excel Solver analysis, 132
 go/no-go assumptions, 135
 identifying and documenting,  
  123–132
 keeper of assumptions, 153
 launching enterprise, testing after,  
  153–154 likely and worst-case scenario idea,  
  128–132
 manufacturing business, checkpoint  
 template for, 133
 Monte Carlo simulations, 132
 most important assumptions,  
  identifying, 127–132
 moving on from, 138
 operations assumptions, 124–127
 pressure test learning, 153–154
 service business, checkpoint  
  template for, 134
 showstopper assumptions, 135
 tough love test, 139–140
 Zambia Feeds example, 126, 127,  
  128–131, 136–137
attractiveness features. See 
segmentation of market
B
beneficiaries of programs. 
 See customers
beneficiary experience. See experience 
 of beneficiary, understanding
bigness, challenges of. See scaling up
 break-even operator, 167, 168
C
capabilities required, 45, 48–52
cash flow management skills, 145
CEMEX (Mexico) program, 36–37
changing direction of enterprise. See 
management
charities, 167, 168, 169
Christensen, Clayton, 149
competition
 advisory board, role of, 42–43
 
assessment of comparable   
 organizations, 97
 checklist, 43
 Ikotoilets, for, 38, 41Index206     Index
 innovation, examples of, 36–37
 outperforming, 43
 scaling up, challenges of, 177
 subsidized government or NGO  
  programs, 35–36
 tough love test, 43–44
 Zambia Feeds, for, 35, 38, 39–40, 41
concept statement, 77–80
corruption and bribery, 9
costs
 assumptions, managing and testing  
  ( See assumptions)
 early investment, minimizing,  
  147–148
 estimation of operating costs,  
  104–111
 identification of, 53, 54
 maximum allowable costs, 101, 103,  
  104, 114–115
 scaling up, challenges of 
  ( See scaling up)
 surplus cash, needs for, 101–103
 total costs, calculation of, 111–112
cultural understanding. See experience  
 of beneficiary, understanding
customers
 attractiveness features, 21–22, 24, 27
 behavior, changing, 6, 8
 competitive alternatives for 
  ( See competition)
 define and segment target   
  population ( See segmentation  
  of market)
 experience of beneficiary,   
  understanding, 29–34
 key initial beneficiaries, specifying,  
  148–151
 plausibility criteria, 9–12
 scaling up, challenges from,  
  182–183
 testing concept with, 112–113
 users and payers, 17–19
D
deliverables. See operations
discovery-driven plan (DDP), 83–85.   See also assumptions
 updating, 154–155
disengagement. See failure of   
 enterprise
distributor rationing and price  
 gouging, 181–182
E
Ecotact, 6–8, 16. See also Ikotoilet
employees/workers
 scaling up, challenges of, 179–180,  
  183, 186, 187–189, 190
 start-up, skills needed for, 144–145
 technical qualifications, 9
 wages, 9
 The Entrepreneurial Mindset   
 (McGrath and MacMillan), 83–84
equipment, ease of operation of, 9
“escalation of commitment” 
 problem, 157, 170
Excel Solver analysis, 132
expanding enterprise. See scaling up
experience of beneficiary, 
understanding, 29–30
 checklist, 34
 competitive alternatives 
  ( See competition)
 condom use, 29–30
 Ikotoilet example, 33
 tough love test, 34
 Zambia Feeds example, 30–32
F
failure of enterprise. See also   
 management
 defining, 157–158
 preplan fro disengagement, 159–161
financial goals. See revenue
fish farming operation, 178–179
framing and scoping
 checklist, 98–99
 discovery-driven plan (DDP), 83–85
 Khaya Cookie Company (South  
  Africa), 86–91
 nonprofits and scoping, 96–97
 reality check on numbers, 97–98Index      207
 revenue, 85–86, 88, 89–91, 92,  
  94–96
 social impact, 84, 86–86, 87–89,  
  90–91, 93, 95–96, 97
 tough love test, 99
 Zambia Feeds, 83, 91–96
funding sources, identification of, 53, 
55. See also revenue
G
Gandhi, Mahatma, 7
Gibbs, Grant, 17–18
goals and scope of operations. See 
framing and scoping
governmental authorities
 increased attention from, 178–179
growing the enterprise. See scaling up
H
Hippo Roller, 17–18
HIV/AIDS
 electronic medical services system,  
  57–58, 60–61, 64–65, 70–73 
  ( See also  AidsAid system)
 orphans in Malawi, 169–170
 prevention and condom use, 29–30
I
Ikotoilet (East Africa), 6–8, 16
 competitive alternatives to, 38, 41
 deliverables table, 48, 49, 50–51
 experience of beneficiary,   
 understanding, 33
 segmentation of market, 25–27
Ilona. See Zambia Feeds
J
Jaytee. See AidsAid system
K
Khaya Cookie Company (South  
 Africa), 138, 160–161, 163–164
 framing and scoping venture, 86–91
 minimum performance   
  requirements, 103
 scaling up, challenges of, 179 testing concept, 112–113
Knight, Frank, xi
Kuria, David, 7–8, 16, 25. 
 See also  Ikotoilet
L
labor unions, 179–180
launching enterprise, 143
 after-action reviews, 154
 assumptions, aggressive testing of,  
  153–154
 celebrate early successes, 152–153
 checklist, 155
 early investment, minimizing,  
  147–148
 early sales as learning opportunities,  
  154
 employee skills needed, 144–145
 expectations vs. actual results,  
  149–151
 key initial beneficiaries, specifying,  
  148–151
 learning from pressure test,  
  153–154
 negotiation challenges, 145–147
  preparation for what could go  
  wrong, 146
 preparing ground, 143–148
 quality product, relentless delivery  
  of, 152
 tough love test, 155–156
 updating DDP , 154–155
M
McGrath, Rita Gunther, 37, 83–84
MacMillan, Ian, 37, 83–84
Malawi
 AIDS orphans, helping, 169–170
  condom use in, 29–30
 peanut farming in, 153–154
management
 aspirations cascade, 165–170
 capacity overload, 185
 checklist, 170–171
 delegation with growth, 189208     Index
 disengagement, preplan for,  
  159–161
 “escalation of commitment”  
  problem, 157, 170
 failure, defining, 157–158
 negative second-order effects,  
  164–165
 orientation programs, 188–189
 redirection or change of enterprise,  
  165–170
 scaling up, challenges from,  
  183–189 ( See also scaling up)
 second-order effects, monitor for,  
  161–165
 sociopolitics, monitoring of,  
  158–159
 tough love test, 171
 values, conveyance of, 188–189
MarketBusters  (McGrath and   
 MacMillan), 56
market-scaler enterprise, 166, 168
market segmentation.   
 See segmentation of market
materials and equipment, 45–48
Monte Carlo analysis, 132
N
negotiation challenges, 145–147
nonprofit organizations
 aspirations cascade, on, 167, 168
 revenue, unit of, 17–19
 scoping and, 96–97
nutrition, 5–6
O
operations
 asset funding, 115–118
 assumptions, managing and testing  
  ( See assumptions)
 beneficiaries, required capabilities  
  of, 51–52
 capabilities required, 45, 48–52
 checklist, 55–56, 120
 costs ( See costs)
 deliverables tables, 45, 46–47,  
  49–50, 54, 106, 108–109 employee skills needed, 144–145
 funding sources, 53, 55
 goals and scope of ( See framing 
  and scoping)
 interpretation of numbers, 118–120
 materials and equipment, 45–48
 operating income statement,  
 projected, 113–115
 revenue ( See revenue)
 scaling up, challenges of 
  ( See scaling up)
 tough love test, 56, 121
P
partial leverager enterprise, 167, 168
Patrimonio Hoy (CEMEX), 37
performance criteria
 checklist, 19
 Hippo Roller example, 17–18
 tough love test, 19–20
 unit of revenue, 16–19
 unit of social impact, 15–16
planning process, 83–84
 assumptions and checkpoints 
  ( See assumptions and checkpoints)
 deliverables, specifying 
  ( See operations)
 framing and scoping venture 
  ( See framing and scoping)
plausibility criteria, 8–9
 screen-in criteria, 10–12
 screen-out criteria (disqualifiers),  
  9–10
 Zambia Feeds, 11–12
poultry farmers. See Zambia Feeds
R
reliant enterprise, 167, 168, 169
return on sales (ROS), on assets  
 (ROA). See revenue
revenue
 assumptions, managing and testing  
  ( See assumptions)
 framing and scoping, 85–86, 88, 
  89–91, 92, 94–96 ( See also
  framing and scoping)Index      209
 learning opportunities, early sales  
  as, 154
 payers distinguished from users,  
  17–19
 required revenues, 101, 103–104,  
  113–115
 scaling up, challenges of 
  ( See scaling up)
 surplus cash, needs for, 101–103
 unit of measurement, 16–19
risk
 plausibility criteria, 8–12
 uncertainty moving to, xv–xix
S
sanitation problem, 6–8
scaling up
 anticipation of, 189–191
 attention from authorities,   
  increased, 178–179
 beneficiary demands and   
 expectations, escalation of, 182–183
 challenges, table of, 175–176
 checklist, 191–192
 competition, increasingly   
  aggressive, 177
 cookie-cutter modality, 173
 delegation of tasks, 189
 distributor rationing and price  
  gouging, 181–182
 ecosystem strains, 180–183
 expansion from the core, 173–174
 financing challenges, 186, 191
 human resource challenges,  
  186–187, 189–190
 labor and employee management  
  challenges, 179–180, 183, 186,  
  187–189, 190
 middle managers, recruitment of,  
  187
 planning ahead for financing, 191
 production challenges, 185
 recruiting and training ahead of  
  needs, 190–191
 supervisors, management   
  through, 188 supplier system overload, 180–181
 tough love test, 192–193
 values of management, conveyance  
  of, 188–189
 vested interests, increased attention  
  from, 179
 visibility, hazards of, 175, 176–180
scope of operations. See framing and 
scoping
second-order effects, 161–165
segmentation of market, 21
 attractiveness features, 21–22, 24, 27
 checklist, 28
 Ikotoilet example, 25–27
 scaling up, challenges from, 183–185
 tough love test, 28
 Zambia Feeds example, 22–24
self-sufficiency, 9
self-sustainer enterprise, 166–167, 168
selling skills, 144
sensitivity analyses, 127–132
Singer “hire-purchase” plan, 36, 37
Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook  
 Advisory Group, ix–x
social impact
 framing and scoping, 84, 85–86,  
  87–89, 90–91, 93, 95–96, 97
 scaling up (See scaling up)
  stakeholder impacts ( See  
  sociopolitical challenges)
 unit of measurement, 15–16
social problem
 advisory board, 12–13
 agriculture/nutrition, 5–6
 articulating problem/solution, 3–8
 performance expectations of  
  program ( See performance 
  criteria)
 plausibility of solution 
  ( See plausibility criteria)
 sanitation, 6–8
 Zambia Feeds example, 5–6
sociopolitical challenges, 57–59
 AidsAid example, 57–58, 60–61,  
  64–65, 70–73, 159
 210     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
 categorization of stakeholders,  
  62–65
 checklist, 74
 identification of stakeholders, 60–62
 mapping of stakeholders, 64–65
 monitoring sociopolitics, 158–159
 negative and positive impacts  
  (stakeholders), 60–61
 scaling up, challenges of 
  ( See scaling up)
 stakeholder impact table, 61, 139,  
  154–155
 strategy, development of, 65–69
 tactics for each stakeholder, 69–74
 tough love test, 74–75
stakeholder impacts, strategy, and  
 tactics. See sociopolitical challenges
Staw, Barr, 157
supplier system overload, 180–181
surplus cash, 101–103
T
target population. See customers
tough love tests. See specific subject  
 headings
U
uncertainty, level of, xv–xvi
 risk, converting to, xv–xix
understanding customer.   
 See experience of beneficiary, 
understanding
users of programs/products.
 See customers
W
wages, 9
walkaway position, 146
Watkins, Susan, 29–30
Wharton Social Enterprise Program,  
 xiii–xv
Widows and Orphans Project, 161
willingness to adopt program 
 or product. See segmentation 
 of market
workers. See employees/workers
World Food Programme, 18Z
Zambia Feeds, 3, 16, 158–159, xi–xii, 
 xix–xx
 advisory board, 13
 articulating problem/solution, 5–6
 asset funding, 117–118
 assumptions, managing and testing,  
  126, 127, 128–131, 136–137
 attractiveness features by market  
  segment, 24
 beneficiary experience table with  
  required capabilities, 51, 52
 competitive alternatives to, 35, 38,  
  39–40, 41
 concept statement for, 79
 costs, identification of, 53, 54
 defining and segmenting market,  
  22–24
 deliverables tables, 46–47, 49–50, 
  54, 106, 108–109, 128–29
 disengagement, preplan for, 160
 estimation of operating costs,  
  105–111
 expectations vs. actual results,  
  150–151
 experience of beneficiary,   
  understanding, 30–32
 framing and scoping venture, 83,  
  91–96
 funding sources/table, 53, 55
 minimum performance   
  requirements, 104
 operating income statement,  
  114–115
 operations realities, 45–47, 49–50,  
  51
 plausibility criteria, 11–12
 preparation for what could go  
  wrong, 146
 scaling up, challenges of, 177, 180,  
  181–183, 184–185, 187, 189, 190
 second-order effects, 162–163,  
  164–165
 segmentation of market, 22–24
 testing concept, 112, 113
 unit of social impact, 15–16211About the Authors
Ian (Mac) C. MacMillan  is the academic director of the Sol C. 
Snider Entrepreneurial Research Center and Dhirubhai Ambani 
Professor of Entrepreneurship and Innovation at the Wharton 
School, University of Pennsylvania.
 Mac has taught at Columbia University, New Y ork University, 
Northwestern University, and the University of South Africa. 
Prior to joining the academic world, he was a chemical engineer, 
and gained experience in gold and uranium mines, chemical and 
explosives factories, oil refineries, soap and food manufacturers, and 
the South African Atomic Energy Board. He has also been a director 
of companies in the travel, import-export, and pharmaceutical 
fields in the United States, South Africa, Canada, Hong Kong, 
and Japan. Mac is the author or a coauthor of books and articles 
on new ventures, innovation, organizational politics, and strategy 
formulation. His articles have appeared in Harvard Business Review 
and Sloan Management Review . He is coauthor of the bestselling 
books Corporate Venturing , The Entrepreneurial Mindset, Market 
Busters, Unlocking Opportunities for Growth , and Discovery-Driven 
Growth .
 
James D. Thompson  is cofounder and director of the Wharton 
Social Entrepreneurship Program. His areas of research focus are 
social entrepreneurship, building future markets, and investment 
under conditions of high, or near-Knightian, uncertainty. 
 Jim teaches in Wharton Executive Education programs and 
works with management teams around the world to design and 
execute organic growth strategies that increase the value of their firms. 
Prior to joining the academic world, he was a divisional director of a 212     The Social Entrepreneur’s Playbook
public company, responsible for business unit turnarounds and new 
market development. He currently serves on the executive board of a 
venture capital–funded company in Philadelphia and served on the 
investment advisory committee of a Swiss social entrepreneurship 
investment fund.
 Jim holds a PhD from EPFL (École Polytechnique Fédérale de 
Lausanne) and has been published in the Harvard Business Review , 
Journal of Management ,  Long Range Planning ,  Management Science , 
Organization Science , and the Research-Technology Management 
Journal . He is a recipient of Best Paper Awards in innovation by the 
European Business School and the Thought Leader category of the 
Entrepreneurship Division at the U.S. Academy of Management.Wharton School Press, the book publishing arm of The Wharton 
School of the University of Pennsylvania, was established to inspire 
bold, insightful thinking within the global business community. 
 Wharton School Press publishes a select list of award-winning, 
bestselling, and thought-leading books that offer trusted business 
knowledge to help leaders at all levels meet the challenges of today 
and the opportunities of tomorrow. Led by a spirit of innovation and 
experimentation, Wharton School Press leverages groundbreaking 
digital technologies and has pioneered a fast-reading business book 
format that fits readers’ busy lives, allowing them to swiftly emerge 
with the tools and information needed to make an impact. Wharton 
School Press books offer guidance and inspiration on a variety of 
topics, including leadership, management, strategy, innovation, 
entrepreneurship, finance, marketing, social impact, public policy, 
and more.
 Wharton School Press also operates an online bookstore 
featuring a curated selection of influential books by Wharton School 
faculty and Press authors published by a wide range of leading 
publishers.
 To find books that will inspire and empower you to increase 
your impact and expand your personal and professional horizons, 
visit wsp.wharton.upenn.edu .About Wharton School PressFounded in 1881 as the world’s first collegiate business school, 
the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania is shaping 
the future of business by incubating ideas, driving insights, and 
creating leaders who change the world. With a faculty of more 
than 235 renowned professors, Wharton has 5,000 undergraduate, 
MBA, Executive MBA, and doctoral students. Each year 18,000 
professionals from around the world advance their careers through 
Wharton Executive Education’s individual, company-customized, 
and online programs. More than 99,000 Wharton alumni form a 
powerful global network of leaders who transform business every 
day. 
For more information, visit www.wharton.upenn.edu .About The Wharton School